Eithetairus, an Athenian citizen, but disgusted with 
his own country, starts on his travels proposing to seek his 
fortune in the kingdom of the Birds. He is represented as the 
essential man of business and ability, the true political adven- 
turer the man who directs every thing and every body who is never 
in the wrong, never at a loss, never satisfied with what has been done 
by others, uniformly successful in his operations. He maintains a 
constant ascendency, or if he loses it for a moment, recovers it 
immediately. 

Ejielpides a simple easy-minded droll companion, his natural 
follower and adherent as the Merry Andrew is of the Mountebank. 
It will be seen that, like the Merry Andrew, he interposes his buffoonish 
comments on the grand oration delivered by his master. 

Epops, King of the Birds formerly Tereus, King of Thrace, but 
long ago, according to the records of mythology, transformed into a 
Hoopoe. He appears as the courteous dignified sovereign of a primitive 
uncivilized race, whom he is desirous to improve he gives a gracious 
reception to strangers arriving from a country more advanced in 
civilization and adopts the projects of aggrandizement suggested to 
him by Peithetairus. 

The CJioriis of Birds, his subjects, retain, on the contrary, their 
hereditary hatred and suspicion of the human race they are ready to 
break out into open mutiny against their king, and to massacre his 
foreign human advisers upon the spot. It is with the greatest 
difficulty that they can be prevailed upon to hear reason, and attend 
to the luminous exposition of Peithetairus. His harangue has the effect 
of conciliating and convincing them his projects are adopted without a 
dissentient voice. War is not immediately declared against the gods, 
but a sort of Mexican blockade is established by proclamation. 

Prometheus, a malcontent deity, the ancient patron of the human 
race, still retaining a concealed attachment to the deposed dynasty of 
Saturn. He comes over secretly with intelligence, which Peithetairus 
avails himself of, and which proes ultimately decisive of the subjugation 
of the crods. 



Nepttme 1 joint ambassadors from the gods, commissioned 

He7cules, 1 to treat with Peithetairus. Nept2i7ie is re- 

T7iballis, or the f presented as a formal dignified personage of 

Triballian J the old school Hercules as a passionate, 

wrong-headed, greedy blockhead he is cajoled and gained over by 
Peithetairus and in his turn intimidates the Tiiballiaii an ignorant 
barbarian deity, who is hardly able to speak intelligibly. They join 
together, Neptune is out-voted, and Peithetairus concludes a treaty by 
which his highest pretensions are realized. 

The characters above mentioned are the only ones who contribute 
in any way to the progress of the drama the remainder, a very 
amusing set of persons, are introduced in detached scenes, exemplify- 
ing the various interruptions and annoyances incident to the man of 
business, distracting his attention and embarrassing him in the 
exercise of his authoritative functions. There are, however, excep- 
tions,  

his, who is brought in, having been captured and detained for an 
infringement of the blockade. 

A Priest who comes to sacrifice at the inauguration of the 
new city. 

Two Messenge7s arriving from different quarters, with very interest- 
ing and satisfactory intelligence. 

The rest are a mere series of intruders on the time and attention of 
the great man. 

A Poet, a ragged vagabond, who comes begging with an inaugural 
ode on the foundation of the new city. 

A Soothsayer, arriving with oracles relative to the same im- 
portant event, and a demand of perquisites due to himself by divine 
authority. 

Metoji, the Astronomer, proposes to make a plan and survey of the 
new city. 

A Co7ii77iissio7ier from Athens, a very authoritative personage. 

A Ve7idor of copies of decrees he enters, reading them aloud, like 
a hawker to attract purchasers. 

A Pa77icide, a young man who has beaten his father, and proposes 
to strangle him, offers himself as a desirable acquisition to the new 
colony. 

A/i l7ifo7incr, a young man whose hereditary trade is that of an 
informer, and whose practice extends to the Islands, comes with the 
same application. 



y  



ACT I. 

Scene a ivild desolate coiintry with a bare open prospect on one 
side, and some rocks covered with shrubs and brushwood in the 
centre of the stage. Enter Peithetairiis and Euelpides the one 
ivith a Raven and the other with a fackdaw on his hand. 

Euelpides speaking to his Jackdav. 

IGHT on, do ye say ? to the tree there in the distance ? 
Pei. speaking first to his Raven, and then to his com- 
panion. Plague take ye ! Why, this creature calls us 
back ! 

En. What use can it answer tramping up and down ? 
Were lost, I tell ye our journeys come to nothing. 
Fei, To think of me travelling a thousand stadia 
With a Raven for my adviser ! 

Ell. Think of me too, 

Going at the instigation of a Jackdaw, 
To wear my toes and my toe-nails to pieces ! 

Fei. I dont know even the country, where weve got to. 
Eu. And yet you expect to find a country here, lo 

A country for yourself! 

Fei. Truly, not I 

Not even Execestides could do it. 
That finds himself a native every where. 

Eu. Oh dear ! Were come to ruin, utter ruin ! 
Fei. Then go that way, cant ye?  the Road to Ruin! 
F. I 



Tni BiRDs. 



Eu. He has brought us to a fine pass, that crazy fellow 
Philocrates the poultere he pretended 
To enable us to find where Tereus lives 
The King that was, the Hoopoe that is now 
Persuading us to buy these creatures of him, 
That Raven there for three-pence, and this other,  
This little Tharrelides of a Jackdaw,  
He charged a penny fo but neither of em 
Are fit for any thing but to bite and scratch. 

Speaking to his Jackdaw. 
Well, what are ye after now? gaping and poking ! 20 

Youve brought us straight to the rock. Where would you 

take us ? 
Theres no road here I 

Pei. No, none, not even a path. 

Eu. Nor dont your Raven tell us any thing? 

Pei. Shes alterd somehow  she croaks differently. 

Eu. But which way does she point? What does she say? 

Pei. Say? Why, she says, shell bite my fingers off. 

Eu. Well, truly its hard upon us, hard indeed. 
To go with our own carcases to the crows, 
And not be able to find em after all. 

Tiuiiitig to the audie7ice. 
For our design, most excellent spectators, 30 

Our passion, our disease, or what you will, 
Is the reverse of that which Sacas feels 
For he, though not a native, strives perforce 
To make himself a citize whilst we, 
Known and acknowledgd as Athenians born, 
Not hustled off, nor otherwise compelld, 
Have deemd it fitting to betake ourselves 
To these our legs, and make our person scarce. 



ACT I. 



Not through disgust or hatred or disdain 
Of our illustrious birth-place, which we deem 
Glorious and fre with equal laws ordaind 
For fine and forfeiture and confiscatio 
With taxes universally diffuse 
And suits and pleas abounding in the Courts. 

For grasshoppers sit only for a month 
Chirping upon the twig but our Athenians 40 

Sit chirping and discussing all the year, 
Perchd upon points of evidence and law. 

Therefore we trudge upon our present travels, 
With these our sacrificial implements, 
To seek some easier unlitigious place, 
Meaning to settle there and colonize. 
Our present errand is in search of Tereus, 
The Hoopoe that is now to learn from him 
If in his expeditions, flights, and journeys, 
He ever chanced to light on such a spot. 

PeL Holloh ! 

Eu. Whats that? 

Pei. My raven here points upwards. 

 Decidedly ! 50 

Eu. Ay, and heres my Jackdaw, too. 

Gaping as if she saw something above.  
Yes, Ill be bound for i this must be the plac 
Well make a noise, and know the truth of it. 

Pei. Then kick against the rock. 

Eu. Knock you your head 

Against the rock!  and make it a double knock! 

Pei. Then fling a stone at it! 



I  2 



THE BIRDS. 



Ell. With all my heart, 

Holloh, there! 

Pel. What do you mean with your Holloh? 

You should cry Hoop for a Hoopoe. 

Eu. Well, then. Hoop ! 

Hoop and holloh, there!  Hoopoe, Hoopoe, I say! 6o 

Trochilus. Whats here? Whos bawling there ? Who wants 
my master? 

The door is opened, and both parties start at seeing each other. 

Eu, Oh mercy, mighty Apollo ! what a beak ! 

Tr. Out ! out upon it ! a brace of bird-catchers ! 

Eu. Now tell me, in heavens name, what creature are ye? 

Tr. Im a Slave Bird. 70 

Eu. A slave ! how did it happen ? 

AVere you made prisoner by a fighting cock? 

Tr. No. When my master made himself a Hoopoe, 
He beggd me to turn bird to attend upon him. 

Eu. Do birds, then, want attendance? 

Tr. Yes, of course 

In his case, having been a man before, 
He longs occasionally for human diet, 
His old Athenian fare pilchards for instance,  
Then I must fetch the pilchard sometimes porridg 
He calls for porridge, and I mix it for him. 

Eu, Well, youre a dapper waiter, a Didapper 



AC 7 I. 



But, Didapper, I say, do step within there, 80 

And call your master out. 

Tr. But just at present 

Hes taking a little rest after his luncheon, 
Some myrtle berries and a dish of worms. 

Eu. No matter, call him her we wish to speak to him. 

Tr. Hell not be pleasd, Im sur but, notwithstanding, 
Since you desire it, Ill make bold to call him. [Exit. 

Pei. looking after him. Confound ye, I say, youve frightend 
me to death. 

Eu. He has scared away my Jackda its flown away. 

Pei. You let it go yourself, you coward. 

Eu. Tell me, 

Have not you let your Raven go? 

Pei. Not I. 90 

E2C. Where is it then? 

Pei. Flown off of its own accord. 

Eu. You did not let it go ! youre a brave fellow I 

The Hoopoe from ivithifi. Open the door, I sa let me go 
forth. 

The Royal Hoopoe appears with a tremendous beak and crest. 

Eu. O Hercules, what a creature ! What a plumage ! 



THE BIRDS. 



And a triple tier of crests what can it be ! 

Hoo. Who calld? who wanted me? 

Eu. May the heavenly powers  

Confound ye ! I say aside. 

Hoo. You mock at me, perhaps, 

Seeing these plumes.  But, stranger, you must know 
That once I was a man. 

Eu. We did not laugh 

At you. Sir. 

Hoo. What, then, were you laughing at? 

Eu. Only that beak of yours seemd rather odd. 

Hoo. It was your poet Sophocles that reduced me loo 
To this condition with his tragedies. 

Eu. What are you, Tereus? Are you a bird, or what? 

Hoo. A bird. 

Eu. Then where are all your feathers? 

Hoo. Gone. 

Eu. In consequence of an illness ? 

Hoo. No the Birds 

At this time of the year leave off their feathers. 
But yo what are ye? Tell me. 

Eu. Mortal men. 

Hoo. What countrymen? 

Eu. Of the country of the Triremes. 

Hoo. Jurymen, I suppose? 



 Athens, mistress of the sea. 



AC! I. 



Eu. Quite the reverse, 

Were anti-jurymen. no 

Hoo. Does that breed still 

Continue amongst you? 

Eu. Some few specimens 

Youll meet with, here and there, in country places. 

Hoo. And what has brought you here. What was your 
object? 

Eu. We wishd to advise with you. 

Hoo. With me ! For what ? 

Eu. Because you were a man, the same as u 
And found yourself in debt, the same as us 
And did not like to pay, the same as u 
And after that, you changed into a bird, 
And ever since have flown and wanderd far 
Over the lands and seas, and have acquird 
All knowledge that a bird or man can learn. 

Therefore we come, as suppliants, to beseech 120 

Your favour and advice to point us out 
Some comfortable country, close and snug, 
A country like a blanket or a rug, 
Where we might fairly fold ourselves to rest. 

Hoo. Do you wish then for a greater state than Athens? 

Eu. Not greater, but more suitable for us. 

Hoo. Its clear youre fond of aristocracy. 

Eu. What, him, the son of Scellias ! Aristocrates ? 
I abhor him. 

Hoo. Well, what kind of a town would suit ye? 

Eu. Why, such a kind of town as this, for instance, 
A town where the importunities and troubles 



THE BIRDS. 



Are of this sort. Suppose a neighbour calls 

Betimes in the morning with a sudden summons 

Now, dont forget, says he, for heavens sake, 130 

To come to me to-morro bring your friends, 

Children, and all, weve wedding cheer at home. 

Come early, mind ye, and if you fail me now. 

Dont let me see your face when Im in trouble. 

Hoo. Ay! Youre in love, I see, with difficulties 
And miseries. Well, theres a city, in fact. 
Much of this sor one that I think might suit ye, 
Near the Red Sea. 145 

En. No, no ! not near the sea ! 

Lest I should have the Salaminian galley 
Arriving some fine morning with a summons 
Sent after me, and a poursuivant to arrest me. 

But tell me, among the birds here, how do ye find it? 155 
What kind of an existence? 

Hoo. Pretty fai 

Not much amiss. Time passes smoothly enoug 
And money is out of the question. We dont use it. 

Ell. Youve freed yourselves from a great load of dross. 

Hoo. Weve our field sports. We spend our idle mornings 
With banqueting and collations in the gardens, 
With poppy seeds and myrtle. 160 

Eu. So your time 

Is passd like a perpetual wedding-day. 

Peithetairus breaks out as from a profound raerie. 

Pet. Hah ! What a power is here what opportunities ! 
If I could only advise you I see it all ! 
The means for an infinite empire and command ! 

Hoo. And what would you have us do? Whats your advice ? 



ACT I. 9 

PcL Do! what would I have ye do? Why, first of all 
Dont flutter and hurry about all open-mouthd 
In that undignified way. 

Hoo. What then? 

Pei. emphatically. Concentrat 

Bring all your birds together. Build a city. 

Hoo. The birds! How could we build a city? Where? 

Pei. Nonsense. You cant be serious. What a question I 
Look down. 175 

Hoo. I do. 

Pei. Look up now. 

Hoo. So I do. 

Pei. Now turn your neck round. 

Hoo. I should sprain it though. 

Pei. Come, what dye see ? 

Hoo. The clouds and sk  thats all. 

Pei. Well, that we call the pole and the atmospher 
And would it not serve you birds for a metropole? 
Well, there then, you may build and fortify, 
And call it your metropolis,  your acropolis. 
From that position youll command mankind, 185 

And keep them in utter thorough subjugation 
Just as you do the grasshoppers and locusts. 
And if the gods offend you, youll blockade em, 
And starve em to a surrender. 

Hoo. In what way ? 

Pei. Why thus. Your atmosphere is placd, you see, 
In a middle point, just betwixt earth and heaven. 

A case of the same kind occurs with us. 
Our people in Athens, if they send to Delphi 
With deputations, offerings, or what not. 
Are forced to obtain a pass from the Boeotian 



lO THE BIRDS. 



Thus, when mankind on earth are sacrificing, 
If you should find the gods grown mutinous 
And insubordinate, you could intercept 
All their supplies of sacrificial smoke. 

Hoo. By the earth and all its springs ! springes and nooses ! 
Odds nets and snares! this is the cleverest notio 195 

And I could find it in my heart to venture, 
If the other Birds agree to the proposal. 

Pei. But who must state it to them? 

Hoo. You yoursel 

Theyll understand ye, I found them mere barbarian 
Bat living here a length of time amongst them, 
I have taught them to converse and speak correctly. 200 

Pti. How will you summon them? 

Hoo. Thats easy enoug 

Ill just step into the thicket here hard by. 
And call my Nightingale. Shell summon them. 
And when they hear her voice, I promise you 
Youll see them all come running here pell mell. 

Pei. My dearest, best of birds! dont lose a moment, 
I beg, but go directly into the thicket 
Nay, dont stand here, go call your Nightingale. 

\Exit Hoopoe. 

QyiG,from behind the scene, supposed to be sung by the Hoopoe. 

Awake ! awake ! 
Sleep no more, my gentle mate ! 
With your tiny tawny bill, 210 

Wake the tuneful echo shrill, 
On vale or hil 



ACT L II 

Or in her airy rocky seat, 
Let her Hsten and repeat 
The tender ditty that you tell, 

The sad lament, 

The dire event, 
To luckless Itys that befell. 

Thence the strain 

Shall rise again. 

And soar amain. 
Up to the lofty palace gate, 
Where mighty Apollo sits in state 
In Joves abode, with his ivory lyre, 
Hymning aloud to the heavenly quire 
While all the gods shall join with thee 220 

In a celestial symphony. 

A solo on the flute supposed to be the Nightingales call. 

Pei. Oh, Jupiter ! the dear delicious bird ! 
With what a lovely tone she swells and falls. 
Sweetening the wilderness with delicate air. 
Eu. Hist ! 
Pei. What? 

Eu. Be quiet, cant ye ! 

Pei. Whats the matter? 

Eu. The Hoopoe is just preparing for a song. 
Hoo. Hoop ! hoop ! 

Come in a troop, 
Come at a call, 
One and all. 
Birds of a feather. 
All together. 
Birds of an humble gentle bill 
Smooth and shrill. 
Dieted on seeds and grain, 230 



THE BIRDS. 



Rioting on the furrowd plain, 

Pecking, hopping. 

Picking, popping, 
Among the barley newly so\An. 

Birds of bolder louder tone. 

Lodging in the shrubs and bushes, 

Mavises and Thrushes, 
On the summer berries browsing, 
On the garden fruits carousing, 
All the grubs and vermin smouzing. 

You that in an humbler station, 
With an active occupation. 
Haunt the lowly watery mead, 
Warring against the native breed, 
The gnats and flies, your enemies 
In the level marshy plain 
Of Marathon pursued and slain. 

You that in a squadron driving 250 

From the seas are seen arriving, 
With the Cormorants and Mews 
Haste to land and hear the news ! 

All the featherd airy nation, 
Birds of every size and station. 
Are convend in convocation. 

For an envoy queer and shrewd 

Means to address the multitude, 
And submit to their decision 
A surprising proposition, 
For the welfare of the state. 



ACT I. 13 



Come in a flurry, 
With a hurry, scurry, 
Hurry to the meeting and attend to the debate. 



At this point Mr Frere omits about forty lines and his remarks arc 
interesting enough to occupy worthily the gap thus made in the text. 

The first appearance of the Cho7iis imcst have been a critical point 
for the success of a play. The audience had been b?-oiight into good 
hu7nour by their favourite musical performer, by whom all the 
preceding songs were probably executed j for the dialogue on the stage 
passes solely between Peithetairus and Euelpides, and the Hoopoe, who 
is supposed to sing, does not appear. The Chorus now co?nes on, and 
in the original, forty lines follow, in which Peithetairus and 
Euelpides act as showmen to the exhibition of twenty-four figures, 
dressed i?i itnitation of the phonage of as 7nany different kinds of birds, 
which are passed in review with suitable remaiks as they successively 
take their places in the orchestra. This passage is here omitted. 
Whoever wishes to see how well it can be executed, may be referred to 
Mr Carfs translation. 

The passage in question is much shortened for the present performance, 
and the entry of the Birds is illustrated by some characteristic ballet-music, 
which will speak for itself. 



14 



THE BIRDS. 



While the Birds are bustling about in their new coop of the 
orchestra, Euelpides co7itc7nplates them with surprise, which soon 
changes to alarm. 

The language of the Birds consists almost entirely of sho7t syllables, 
the effect of which it is almost impossible to imitate in English. Some 
accetits, which are added, may serve to make the attempt they are 
added also to two spondaic lines, of which the imitation is more 
practicable. 

Eu. How they thicken, how they muster, 
How they clutter, how they cluster! 
Now they ramble here and -thither, 
Now they scramble altogether. 
What a fidgetting and clattering ! 
What a twittering and chattering 1 
Dont they mean to threaten us? What think ye? 

Fd. Yes, methinks they do. 

Eu. Theyre gaping with an angry look against us both. 

Eei. Its very true. 

Eu. Where is He, the Magistrate that assembled us to 
deliberate? 310 

Hoo. Friends and comrades, here am I, your old associate 
and ally. 

Cho. What have ye to communicate for the benefit of the 
state ? 

EToo. A proposal safe and useful, practicable, profitable, 



ACT I. 15 



Two projectors are arrivd here, politicians shrewd and able. 

Cho. Whee ! whaw ! where ! where ! 
What? what? what? what? what? 

Hoo. I repeat it  human envoys are arrived, a steady pair, 320 
To disclose without reserve a most stupendous huge affair. 
Cho. Chief, of all that ever were, the worst, the most un- 
happy one ! 
Speak, explain ! 

Hoo. Dont be alarmd ! 

Cho. Alas, alas! what have you done? 

Hoo. Ive received a pair of strangers, who desired to settle 

here. 
Cho. Have you riskd so rash an act? 
Hoo. Ive done it, and I persevere. 

Cho. But where are they? 

Hoo. Near beside you near as I am very near. 

Cho. Out, alas ! out, alas ! 

We are betrayd, cruelly betray d 
To a calamitous end. 
Our comrade and our friend, 
Our companion in the fields and in the pastures 
Is the author of all our miseries and disasters. 
Our ancient sacred laws and solemn oath ! 330 

Transgressing both ! 
Treasonably delivering us as a prize 
To our horrible immemorial enemies, 
To a detestable race 
Execrably base ! 
For the Bird our Chief, hereafter he must answer to the State 
With respect to these intruders, I propose, without debate, 



I 6 THE BIRDS. 



On the spot to tear and hack them. 

Ell. There it is, our death and ruin ! 

Ah, the fault was all your own, you know it it was all your 

doing 
You that brought me here, and why? 340 

Pet. Because I wanted an attendant, 

Eu. Here to close my life in tears. 

Pei. No, thats a foolish fear, depend ont. 

Eu. Why a foolish fear? 

Pei. Conside when youre left without an eye, 

Its impossible in natur how could you contrive to cry? 
Cho. Form in rank form in rank 

Then move forward and outflank. 
Let me see them overpowerd, 
Hackd, demolishd, and devourd, 350 

Neither earth, nor sea, nor sky. 
Nor woody fastnesses on high. 
Shall protect them if they fly. 
Wheres the Captain? what detains him? what prevents us to 

proceed ? 
On the right there, call the Captain! let him form his troop 
and lead. 
Eu. There it i where can I fly? 

Pei. Sirrah, be quiet wait a bit. 

Eu. What, to be devourd amongst them ! 



ACT I. 17 

Pei, Will your legs or will your wit 

Serve to escape them? 

Ell. I cant tell. 

Pei. But I can tel do as youre bi 

Fight we must. You see the pot, just there before y take 

the lid, 
And present it for a shield the spit will serve you for a spea 360 
With it you may scare them off, or spike them if they venture 
near. 
Eu. What can I find to guard my eyes? 
Pei. Why, theres the very thing you wish, 

Two vizard helmets ready made, the cullender and skimming 
dish. 
Eu. What a clever, capital, lucky device, sudden and new ! 
Nicias, with all his tactics, is a simpleton to you. 

Cho. Steady, Birds ! present your beaks ! in double time, 
charge and attack ! 
Pounce upon them, smash the potlid, clapperclaw them, tear 
and hack. 
Hoo. Tell me, most unworthy creatures, scandal of the 
featherd race. 
Must I see my friends and kinsmen massacred before my face ? 
Cho. What, do you propose to spare them? Where will 
your forbearance cease, 
Hesitating to destroy destructive creatures such as these? 370 
Hoo. Enemies they might have been but here they come, 
with fair design. 
With proposals of advice, for your advantage and for mine. 
Cho. Enemies time out of mind ! they that have spilt our 
fathers blood, 
How should they be friends of ours, or give us counsel for our 
good? 



1 8 THE BIRDS. 

Hoo. Friendship is a poor adviser politicians deep and wise 
Many times are forcd to learn a lesson from their enemies 
Diligent and wary conduct is the method soon or late 
Which an adversary teaches whilst a friend or intimate 
Trains us on to sloth and ease to ready confidence to rest 
In a careless acquiescenc to believe and hope the best. 
Look on earth ! behold the nations, all in emulation vying,. 
Active all, with busy science engineering, fortifyin 
To defend their hearths and homes, with patriotic industry, 
Fencing every city round with massy walls of masonr 
Tactical devices old they modify with new desig 
Arms offensive and defensive to perfection they refine 
Galleys are equip t and armd, and armies traind to discipline. 
Look to life, in every par in all they practise, all they know. 
Every nation has derived its best instruction from the foe. 380 
Clio. Were agreed to grant a hearin if an enemy can 
teach 
Anything thats wise or useful, let him prove it in his speech. 
Pei. aside. Lets retire a pace or two you see the change 

iii their behaviour. 
Hoo. Simple justice I require, and I request it as a favour. 
Cho. Faith and equity require it, and the nation hitherto 
Never has refused to take direction and advice from you. 
FeL aside. Theyre relenting by degree 
Recover arms and stand at ease. 
Cho. Back to the rear ! resume your station, 400 

Ground your wrath and indignation. 
Sheath your fury, stand at ease ! 
While I proceed to question these 
What design has brought them here? 



ACT L 



19 



Hoh, there, Hoopoe ! cant he hear ? 
Hoo. Whats your question? 

Cho. Who are these? 

Hoo. Strangers from the land of Greece. 

Cho. What design has brought them thence? 410 

Whats their errand or pretence? 
Hoo. They come here simply with a view 

To settle and reside with yo 
Here to remain and here to live. 
Cho. What is the reason that they give? 

Hoo. A project marvellous and strange. 

Cho. Let us hear him ! let us hear him ! 432 

Bid him begin ! for raisd on high 
Our airy fancy soar and I 
Am rapt in hope, ready to fly. 
Hoo. to the Chorus. Here you, take these same arms, in 
the name of Heaven, 
And hang them quietly in the chimney-corne turni?ig to 

Feithefairiis, 
And you, communicate your scheme, exhibiting 
Your proofs and calculations  the discourse 
Which they were calld to attend to. 

Pet. No, not I, 

By Jove ! unless they agree to an armistice 440 

Such as the little poor baboon, our neighbour, 
The sword cutler, concluded with his wife 



2  2 



20 THE BIRDS. 



That they shant bite me, or take unfair advantage 
In any way. 

Cho. We wont. 

Pei. Well, swear it then ! 

Cho. We swear, by our hope of gaining the first prize 
With the general approval and consent 
Of the whole audience, and of all the judges  
And if we fail, may the reproach befall us, 
Of gaining it only by the casting vote. 

\Her?\ Hoo. Hear ye, good people all ! the troops are orderd 
To take their arms within door and consult 
On the report and entry to be made 

Upon our journal of this days proceedings, 450 

Cho. Since time began 

The race of Man 
Has ever been deceitful, faithless ever. 
Yet may our fears be vain ! 
Speak therefore and explain 
If in this realm of ours, 
Your clearer intellect searching and clever, 
Has noticed means or powers 
Unknown and undetected, 
In unambitious indolence neglected, 
Guide and assist our ignorant endeavou 
You, for your willing aid and ready wit, 
Will share with us the common benefit. 460 

Now speak to the business and be not afraid, 
The Birds will adhere to the truce that we made. 



ACT r. 21 



Pel. Im filld with the subject and long to proceed  
My rhetorical leaven is ready to knead. 
Boy, bring me a crown and a basin and ewer. 

Eu. Why, what does he mean ? Are we banqueting, sure ? 

Pei. A rhetorical banquet I mea and I wish 
To serve them at first with a sumptuous dish, 
To astound and delight them.  The grief and compassion 
That oppresses my mind on beholding a nation, 
A people of sovereigns 470 

Clw. Sovereigns we ! 

Pei. Of all the creation ! of this man and me, 
And of Jupiter to for observe that your birth 
Was before the old Titans, and Saturn, and Earth. 

Cho, And Earth ! 

Pei. I repeat it. 

Cho. Thats wonderful news ! 

Pei. Your wonder implies a neglect to peruse 
And examine old sop, from whom you might gather 
That the lark was embarrassd to bury his father 



THE BIRDS. 



On account of the then non-existence of Earth 
And how, to repair so distressing a dearth, 
He adopted a method unheard of and new. 

Cho. If the story you quote is authentic and true, 
No doubt can exist of our clear seniority, 
And the gods must acknowledge our right to authority. 

Eu. Your beaks will be worn with distinction and prid 
The woodpeckers title will scarce be denied 
And Jove the pretender will surely surrender. 480 

Pet Moreover, most singular facts are combined 

In proof that the birds were adored by mankin 
For instance, the Cock was a sovereign of yore 
In the empire of Persia, and ruld it before 
Dariuss tim and you all may have heard 
That his title exists as the Persian bird.... 

Observe that Peithetairus never vouchsafes an answer or takes any 
kijid of 7iotice of his coiJipa7iio7i but pioceeds co7itinuously, except 07ice 
or twice i7i reply to the Chorus, 



ACT I. 2 



Eu. And hence you behold him stalk in pride, 
Majestic and stout, with a royal stride, 
With his turban upright, a privilege known 
Reservd to kings and kings alone. 

Pei So wide was his empire, so mighty his sway, 

That the people of earth to the present day. 

Attend to his summons and freely obey 

Tinkers, tanners, cobblers, all, 490 

Are roused from rest at his royal call, 

And shuffle their shoes on before it is light, 

To trudge to the workshop. 

Eu. I warrant youre righ 

I know to my cost, by the cloak that I lost, 
It was owing to him I was robbd and beguild. 

For a feast had been made for a neighbours child, 
To give it a nam and I went as a guest, 
And sat there carousing away with the res 
But drinking too deep, I fell soundly asleep 
And he began crowin and I never knowing, 
But thinking it morning, went off at the warning, 
With the wine in my pate, to the city gate. 
And fell in with a footpad, was lying in wait, 
Just under the town, and was fairly knockd down 



24 THE BIRDS. 



Then I tried to call ou but before I could shout, 
He strippd me at once with a sudden pull, 
Of a brand new mantle of Phrygian wool. 

Pet Then the Kite was the monarch of Greece heretofore. . . . 

Hoo. Of Greece? 500 

Pei. ...and instructed our fathers of yore, 

On beholding a kite to fall down and adore.... 

Eu. Well, a thing that befel me, was comical quite, 
I threw myself down on beholding a kit 
But turning my face up to stare at his flight. 
With a coin in my mouth, forgetting my penny, 
I swallowd it down, and went home without any. 

Pei. At an era, moreover, of modern date, 

Menelaus the king, Agamemnon the great, 

Had a bird as assessor attending in state, 

Perchd on his sceptre, to watch for a share 510 

Of fees and emoluments, secret or fair. 

Nay, Jupiter now that usurps the command 
Appears with an Eagle, appointed to stand 
As his emblem of empir a striking example 
Of authority once so extended and ample 
And each of the gods had his separate fowl, 
Apollo a Hawk, and Minerva an Owl. 

Cho. Thats matter of fact, and youre right in the main 
But what was the reason I wish youd explain. 

Pei. The reason was this that the bird should be there 
To demand as of right a proportional share 



ACT I. 25 



Of the entrails and fat when an offering was made, 

A suitable portion before them was laid 

Moreover youll find that the race of mankind 

Always swore by a bird and it never was heard 

That they swore by the gods at the time that I mention. 520 

And Lampon himself, with a subtle intention 

Adheres to the old immemorial use 

He perjures and cheats us, and swears by the goose. 

Thus far forth have I provd and shown 
The power and estate that were once your own 
Now totally broken and overthrown 
And need I describe your present tribe, 
Weak, forlorn, exposd to scorn, 
Distressd, oppressd, never at rest, 
Daily pursued with outrage rude. 
With cries and noise of men and boys, 
Screaming, hooting, pelting, shooting. 
The fowler sets his traps and nets, 
Twigs of bird-hme, loops, and snares, 
To catch you kidnappd unawares. 
Even within the temples pale. 
They set you forth for public sale, 

Pawd and handled most severel 530 

And, not content with roasting merely. 
In an insolent device, 
Sprinkle you with cheese and spice 
With nothing of respect or favour, 
Derogating from your flavour. 
Or for a further outrage have ye 
Sousd in greasy sauce and gravy. 



2 6 THE BIRDS. 

Boo. Sad and dismal is the story, 

Human stranger, which you tell, 540 

Of our fathers ancient glory 
Ere the fated empire fell. 
From the depth of degradation 

A benignant happy fate 
Sends you to restore the nation, 
To redeem and save the state. 
I consign to your protection. 

Able to preserve them best, 
All my objects of affection, 

My wife, my children, and my nest. 
Explain then the method you mean to pursue 
To recover our empire and freedom anew. 
For thus to remain in dishonour and scorn, 
Our life were a burthen no more to be borne. 

Fei. Then I move, that the birds shall in common repair 
To a centrical point, and encamp in the ai 550 

And intrench and enclose it, and fortify there 
And build up a rampart impregnably strong, 
Enormous in thickness, enormously long. 
Bigger than Babylon, solid and tall, 
With bricks and bitumen, a wonderful wall. 

E21. Bricks and bitumen ! Im longing to see 
A\lat a daub of a building the city will be ! 

Fei As soon as the fabric is brought to an end, 

A herald or envoy to Jove we shall send, 
To require his immediate prompt abdicatio 
And if he refuses, or shows hesitation, 
Or evades the demand, we shall further proceed 
With legitimate warfare, avowd and decree 
With a warning and notices, formally given, 
To Jove, and all others residing in heaven, 
Forbidding them ever to venture again 
To trespass on our atmospheric domain. 



ACT L 2 J 

With scandalous journles, to visit a list 

Of Alcmenas and Semeles if they persist, 

We warn them that means will be taken moreover 

To stop their gallanting and acting the lover. 

Another ambassador also will go 
Dispatchd upon earth, to the people below, 
To notify briefly the fact of accession, 
And enforcing our claims upon taking possession 
With orders in future, that every suitor. 
Who applies to the gods with an offering made. 
Shall begin with a previous offering, paid 
To a suitable Bird, of a kind and degree 
That accords with the god, whosoever he be. 
In Venuss fane if a victim is slain, 565 

First let a Sparrow be feasted with grain. 
When gifts and oblations to Neptune are made, 
To the Drake let a tribute of barley be paid. 
Let the Cormorants appetite first be appeasd, 
And let Hercules then have an Ox for his feast. 
If you offer to Jove, as the sovereign above, 
A ram for his own, let the Golden-crown, 
As a sovereign bird, be duly preferrd 
Feasted and honoured, in right of his reign, 
With a jolly fat pismire offerd and slain. 

Eu, A pismire, how droll ! I shall laugh till I burst ! 
Let Jupiter thunder and threaten his worst ! 570 

C/w. Then reckon on us for a number and forc 
As on you we rely for a ready resource, 
In council and policy trusting to you 
To direct the design we resolve to pursue. 

Hoo. Thats well, but weve no time, by Jove ! to loiter. 
And dawdle and postpone like Nicias. 640 



2S THE BIDS. 



We should be doing something. First however 
I must invite you to my roosting place, 
This nest of mine, with its poor twigs and leaves. 
And tell me what your names are? 

Pei. Certainly 

My name is Peithetairus. 

Hoo. And your friend? 

Eu, Euelpides from Thria. 

Hoo. Well, youre welcome  

Both of ye. 

Pei. Were obligd. 

Hoo. Walk in together. 

Pei. Go first then, if you please. 

Hoo. No, pray move forward. 

Pei. But bless me  stop, pray  just for a single moment  
Lets see  do tell me  explain  how shall we manage 
To live with you  with a person wearing wings? 
Being both of us unfledgd? 650 

Hoo. Oh ! dont be alarmd well give you a certain root 
That immediately promotes the growth of wings. 

Pei. Come, lets go in the Xanthias, do you mind. 
And Manodorus, follow with the bundles, 

Cho. Holloh ! 

Hoo. Whats the matter? 

Cho. Go in with your party, 

And give them a jolly collation and hearty. 
But the Bird to the Muses and Graces so dear, 



ACT I. 29 



The lovely, sweet Nightingale, bid her appear, 

And leave her amongst us, to sport with us here. 660 

Pet. with a hurried, nervous eagerness. 
O yes, by Jove ! indeed, you must indulge them 
Do, do me the favou call her from the thicket! 
For heavens sake  let me entreat you  bring her here, 
And let us have a sight of her ourselves. 

JIoo. with grave good-breeding. 
Since it is your wish and pleasure, it must be s 
Come here to the strangers, Procne ! show yourself ! 

The Nightingale ente?s from the bush. 
Pel O Jupiter ! what a graceful, charming bird ! 
And what an attire she wears, all bright with gold ! 670 

Eu. Well I should like to kiss her for my part. 
Pei. You blockhead ! With that beak shed run you through. 
Ett. By Jove, then, one must treat her like an Qgg, 
Just clear away the shell and kiss her  thus. 
Hoo. disapprovingly. Lets go. 

Pet. Go first, then, and good luck go with us. 

[Exeunt. 
Cho. O lovely sweet companion meet, 
From morn to night my sole delight, 
My little happy gentle mate, 



30 THE BIRDS, 

You come, you come, O lucky fate 1 680 

Returning here with new deUght, 

To charm the sight, to charm the sight. 
And charm the ear. 

Come, then, anew combine 

Your notes in harmony with mine, 

And with a tone beyond compare 

Begin your Anapaestic air. 
Ye Children of Man ! whose life is a span, 
Protracted with sorrow from day to day, 
Naked and featherless, feeble and querulous. 
Sickly calamitous creatures of clay ! 
Attend to the words of the Sovereign Birds, 
Immortal, illustrious, lords of the air, 
Who survey from on high, with a merciful eye, 
Your struggles of misery, labour, and care. 
Whence you may learn and clearly discern 
Such truths as attract your inquisitive turn 690 

Which is busied of late with a mighty debate, 
A profound speculation about the creation. 
And organical life, and chaotical strife. 
With various notions of heavenly motions. 
And rivers and oceans, and valleys and mountains, 
And sources of fountains, and meteors on high, 
And stars in the sky... We propose by-and-by, 
If youll listen and hear, to make it all clear, 
And Prodicus henceforth shall pass for a dunce. 
When his doubts are explain d and expounded at once. 

Before the creation of ther and Light, 
Chaos and Night together were plight 
In the dungeon of Erebus foully bedight. 



ACT I. 





Nor Ocean, or Air, or Substance was there, 

Or solid or rare, or figure or form, 

But horrible Tartarus ruled in the storm. 

At length, in the dreary chaotical closet 
Of Erebus old, was a privy deposit. 
By Night the primaeval in secrecy laid  
A mystical egg, that in silence and shade 
Was brooded and hatchd, till time came about, 
And Love, the delightful, in glory flew out. 
In rapture and light, exulting and bright, 
Sparkling and florid, with stars in his forehead, 
His forehead and hair, and a flutter and flare, 
As he rose in the air, triumphandy furnishd 
To range his dominions on glittering pinions. 
All golden and azure, and blooming and burnish d 

He soon, in the murky Tartarean recesses, 
With a hurricanes might, in his fiery caresses 
Impregnated Chaos and hastily snatchd 
To being and life, begotten and hatchd, 

The primitive Bird but the Deities all, 700 

The celestial Lights, the terrestrial Ball, 
Were later of birth, with the dwellers on earth 
More tamely combined, of a temperate kind 
When chaotical mixture approach d to a fixture. 

Our antiquity proved, it remains to be shown 
That Love is our author and master alon 
Like him we can ramble, and gambol and fly 
Oer ocean and earth, and aloft to the sk 
And all the world over, were friends to the lover, 
And when other means fail, we are found to prevail 
When a Peacock or Pheasant is sent as a present. 



32 



THE BIRDS. 



All lessons of primary daily concern 
You have learnt from the Birds, and continue to learn. 
Your best benefactors, and early instructors, 
We give you the warning of seasons returning. 
When the Cranes are arranged, and muster afloat 
In the middle air,* with a creaking note, 

Steering away to the Libyan sands, 710 

Then careful farmers sow their land 
The crazy vessel is hauld ashore, 
The sail, the ropes, the rudder, and oar 
Are all unshippd, and housed in store. 

The shepherd is warnd, by the Kite reappearing, 
To muster his flock, and be ready for shearing. 

You quit your old cloak at the Swallows behest, 
In assurance of summer, and purchase a vest. 

For Delphi, for Ammon, Dodona, in fine 
For every oracular temple and shrine, 
The Birds are a substitute equal and fair, 
For on us you depend, and to us you repair 
For counsel and aid when a marriage is made, 
A purchase, a bargain, a venture in trade 
Unlucky or lucky, whatever has struck ye, 
An ox or an ass that may happen to pass, 
A voice in the street, or a slave that you meet, 
A name or a word by chance overheard, 720 

If you deem it an omen, you call it a Bird 



ACT I. 



zz 



And if birds are your omens, it clearly will follow 
That birds are a proper prophetic Apollo. 



Then take us as gods, and youll soon find the odds, 
Well serve for all uses, as prophets and muse 
Well give ye fine weather, well live here togethe 
Well not keep away, scornful and proud, a-top of a cloud, 
In Jupiters way but attend every day 
To prosper and bless all you possess, 

And all your affairs, for yourselves and your heirs. 730 

And as long as you live, we shall give 
You wealth and health, and pleasure and treasure, 
In amjle measur 
And never bilk you of pigeons milk 
Or potable gol you shall live to grow old. 
In laughter and mirth, on the face of the earth, 
Laughing, quaffing, carousing, boozing, 

Your only distress shall be the excess 

Of ease and abundance and happiness. 



Semichorus. 

Muse that in the deep recesses 

Of the forests dreary shade. 
Vocal with our wild addresses. 

Or in the lonely lowly glade 740 

Attending near, art pleased to hear 

Our humble bill, tuneful and shril 
When to the name of omnipotent Pan 

Our notes we raise, or sing in praise 
Of mighty Cybele, from whom we began, 

Mother of nature and every creature. 



34 THE BIRDS. 



Wingd or unwingd, of birds or ma 

Aid and attend, and chaunt with me 
The music of Phrynichus, open and plain, 

The first that attempted a loftier strain. 
Ever busy like the bee, with the sweets of harmony. 750 

Epirrhema. 

Is there any person present sitting a spectator here. 
Who desires to pass his time freely without restraint or fear? 
Should he wish to colonize, he never need be checkd or chid 
For the trifling indiscretions which the testy laws forbid. 

Parricides are in esteem among the birds we deem it fair, 
A combat honourably fought betwixt a game-cock and his heir! 
There the branded runagate, branded and mottled in the face, 
Will be deemd a motley bir a motley mark is no disgrace. 761 

Spintharus, the Phrygian born, will pass a muster there with 
ease, 
Counted as a Phrygian fowl, and even Execestides, 
Once a Carian and a slave, may there be nobly born and free, 
Plume himself on his descent, and hatch a proper pedigree. 

Semichorus. 

Thus the Swans in chorus follow, 770 

On the mighty Thracian stream 
Hymning their eternal theme  
Praise to Bacchus and Apollo 



ACT I. 35 



The welkin rings with sounding wings, 
With songs and cries and melodies, 
Up to the thunderous ther ascending. 

Whilst all that breathe on earth beneath, 

The beasts of the wood, the plain, and the flood, 
In panic amazement are crouching and bending, 

With the awful qualm of a sudden calm 
Ocean and air in silence blending. 

The ridge of Olympus is sounding on high, 780 

Appalling with wonder the lords of the sky, 

And the Muses and Graces, 

Enthroned in their places, 
Join in the solemn symphony. 

Antepirrhema. 

Nothing can be more delightful than the having wings to wear ! 
A spectator sitting here, accommodated with a pair, 
Might for instance if he found a tragic chorus dull and heavy 
Take his flight and dine at home, and if he did not choose to 

leave ye, 
Might return in better humour when the weary drawl was ended. 
Introduce then wings in use  believe me, matters will be 

mended. 
Trust me, wings are all in all ! Diitrephes has mounted quicker 
Than the rest of our aspirants, soaring on his wings of wicker 
Basket work and crates and hampers first enable him to fly 
First a captain, then promoted to command the cavalr 
With his fortunes daily rising, office and preferment new. 
An illustrious, enterprising, airy, gallant Cockatoo. 800 



ACT 11. 



Scene / the Clouds. A hastily constructed altar stands in the 
centre of the stage. Enter Peithetairus and Euelpides. 

Pei. Well, there it is! Such a comical set out, 
By Jove, I never saw ! 

Eu. Why, whats the matter? 

What are you laughing at? 

Pei. At your pen feathers 

Ill tell ye exactly now the thing youre lik 
Youre just the perfect image of a Goose, 
Drawn with a pen in a writing-masters flourish. 

Eu. And youre like a pluckd Blackbird to a tittle. 

Pei. Well, then, according to the line in schylus, 
 Its our own fault, the feathers are our own. 

[?a] Cho. Come, whats to be done? 

Enter the Hoopoe.] 

[Hoo.] Pei. First we must choose a name, 

Some grand, sonorous name, for our new cit 
Then we must sacrifice. 

Eu. I think so too. 

[Pei.] Cho. Lets see  lets think of a name  what shall 
it be? 

Pei. What say ye to the Lacedaemonian name? 
Sparta sounds well  suppose we call it Sparta. 



ACT 11. 



37 



Eu. Sparta! What 6/r/ .? Rushes ! no, not I, 
Id not put up with Sparto for a mattress, 
Much less for a cit were not come to that. 

Pei. Come, then, what name shall it be? 

Eu. Something appropriate, 

Something that sounds majestic, striking, and grand, 
Alluding to the clouds and the upper regions. 

Fei. What think ye of Clouds and Cuckoos? Cuckoo- 
cloudlands 
Or Nephelococcugia ? 

[Hoo.] Cho. That will d 

A truly noble and sonorous name ! 820 

Ell. It will be a genteelish, smart concern, I reckon, 
This city of ours.  Which of the deities 
Shall we have for a patron? We must weave our mantle, 
Our sacred mantle, of course  the yearly mantle  
To one or other of em. 

Pei. Well, Minerva? 

Why should not we have Minerva? Shes establishd, 
Let her continue shell do mighty well. 

Eu. No  there I object for a well orderd city 
The example would be scandalous, to see 

The goddess, a female born, in complete armour 830 

From head to foot, and Cleisthenes with a distaff. 

Pei. What warden will ye appoint for the Eagle tower. 
Your Citadel, the fort upon the rock? 

[Hoo.l Cho. That charge will rest with a chief of our own 
choice. 
Of Persian race, a chicken of the game. 
An eminent warrior. 

Eu. Oh my chicky-biddy ! 

My Httle master ! I should Hke to see him 
Strutting about and roosting on the rock. 



38 THE BIRDS. 



Pei, Come you now ! please to step to the atmosphere, 
And give a look to the work, and help the workme 
And between whiles, fetch bricks and tiles, and such lik 
Draw water, stamp the mortar,  do it barefoo 
Chmb up the ladder tumble down agai 840 

Keep constant watch and war conceal your watch-light 
Then go the rounds, and give the countersign, 
Till you fall fast asleep. Send heralds off, 
 A brace of them  one to the gods above, 
And another, down below there, to mankind. 
Bid them, when they return, inquire for me. 

Eu. For me ! for me ! You may be hangd for me. \Exit. 
Pei. Come, friend, go where I bid you never mind 
The business cant go on without you, any how. 
Its just a sacrifice to these new deities, 
That I must wait for, and the priest thats coming. 
Holloh, you boy there ! bring the basin and ewer ! \Exit. 850 
Cho. We urge, we exhort you, and advise, 
To ordain a mighty sacrific 
And before the gods to bring 
A stupendous offerin 
Either a sheep or some such thing ! 
To please the critics of the age, 
Sacrificed upon the stage. 
Sound amain the Pythian strain ! 
Let Chaeris be brought here to sing. 



ACT 11. 



39 



Cheer is  a had musician is called for, to complete the shahhiness 
of the perfonnance. His representative, the Crozv who is the 
Chceris among birds sounds some discordant notes, till Peithetairus 
stops him. 

Enter Peithetairus with a Priest. 



Pei. Have done there with your puffing  Heaven and Earth, 
Whats here? Ive seen a many curious things, 860 

But never saw the Hke of this before, 

A Crow with a flute and a mouthpiece. Priests, your office 
Perform it ! Sacrifice to the new deities ! 

Priest. I will  but wheres the boy gone with the basket? 
Let us pray to the holy flame. 
And the holy Hawk that guards the same 
To the sovereign Deities, 
All and each, of all degrees. 
Female and male ! 
Pei. [Cho.] Hail thou Hawk of Sunium, hail ! 
Priest. To the Delian and the Pythian Swan, 



And to the Latonian Quail, 
All hail ! 
[C//.] To the Bird of awful stature, 

Mother of Gods, mother of Man 
Pei. [Cho.] Great Cybele ! nurse of Nature! 

Glorious Ostrich, hear our cry. 
Fearful and enormous creature, 
Hugest of all things that fly, 
O preserve and prosper us 
Thou mother of Cleocritus 



870 



Priest. [Cho.] 



Grant the blessings that we seek 



For us and for the Chians eke ! 
Pei. Thats right, the Chians dont forget the Chians ! 880 



40 THE BIRDS. 

F7iest. To the Heroes, Birds, and Heroes sons, 
We call at once, we call and cry. To the Woodpecker, the Jay, the Pie, 
To the Mallard, and the AVidgeon, To the Ringdove and the Pigeon, 
To the Petrel and Sea-mew, To the Dottrel and Curlew, 
To the Vultures and the Hawks, To the Cormorants and Storks, 
To the Rail, to the Quail, To the Peewit, to the Tomtit  

Peithetairus who can do every thing better than every body else, 
undertakes to perforjn the sacrifice. 

Pei. Have done there ! call no more of em are you mad ? 
Inviting all the Cormorants and Vultures, 890 

For a victim such as this ! Why dont you see, 
A Kite at a single swoop would carry it off? 
Get out of my way there with your Crowns and Fillets ! 
Ill do it myself Ill make the sacrifice ! \Exit Priest. 

Cho. Then must I commence again. 

In a simple humble strai 
And invite the gods anew. 
To visit us  but very few  
Or only just a single one, 900 

All alone 
In a quiet easy wa 
Wishing you may find enough. 
If you dine with us to-da 

Our victim is so poor and thin. 
Merely bones, in fact, and skin. 
Pei. We sacrifice and pray to the winged deities. 

Efifer a Poet, very ragged and shabby with a mellifluous 
submissive, mendicatory demea?iour. 

Poet. For the festive, happy day, 

Muse, prepare an early lay 

To Nephelococcugia. 
Pei. Whats here to do? What are you? Where do you 
come from? 



ACT IL 



41 



Poet. An humble menial of the Muses train, 
As Homer expresses it. 910 

Pei. A menial, are you, 

With your long hair? A menial? 

Pod. Tis not that, 

No !  but professors of the poetical art 
Are simply styled, the  Menials of the Muses, 
As Homer expresses it. 

Pei. Ay, the Muse has given you  

A ragged livery. Well, but friend, I say  
Friend ! Poet ! What the plague has brought you here ? 

Poet. Ive made an Ode upon your new-built City, 
And a charming composition for a Chorus, 
.And another in Simonidess manner. 

Pei. in a sharp cross-examining to?ie. When were they made ? 
What time? How long ago? 920 

Poet. From early date, I celebrate in song 
The noble Nephelococcugian state. 

Pei Thats strange, when Im just sacrificing here, 
For the first time, to give the town a name. 
Poet. Intimations swift as air 

To the Muses ear are carried, 
Swifter than the speed and force 
Of the fiery-footed horse 

Hence, the tidings never tarried 
Father, patron, mighty lord. 
Founder of the rising state. 
What thy bounty can afford. 

Be it little, be it great, 
With a quick resolve incline 

To bestow on me and mine. 930 

Pei. This fellow will breed a bustle, and make mischief, 



THE BIRDS. 



If we dont give him a trifle, and get rid of him. 

You there, youve a spare waistcoa pull it off! \To a slave. 
And give it this same clever ingenious poet  
There, take the waistcoat, friend. Ye seem to want it ! 
Poet. Freely, with a thankful heart, 

What the bounteous hand bestows 
Is received in friendly part 

But amid the Thracian snows, 
Or the chilly Scythian plain, 

He the wanderer, cold and lonely, 
With an under-waistcoat only, 
Must a further wish retai 

Which the Muse averse to mention. 
To your gentle comprehension 
Trusts her enigmatic strain. 
Pet. I comprehend it enoug you want a jerkin. 
Here, give him yours one ought to encourage genius. 
There, take it, and good-bye to ye ! 

Poet. Well, Im goin 

And, as soon as I get to the town, Ill set to wor 
And finish something, in this kind of way 

Seated on your golden throne, 950 

Muse, prepare a solemn ditty 
To the mighty, 
To the flighty, 
To the cloudy, quivering, shivering, 
To the lofty seated city. Exit Poet. 



ACT II, 



43 



Pei. Well, I should have thought that jerkin might have 
cured him 
Of his quiverings and shiverings. How the plague 
Did the fellow find us out? I should not have thought it. 

Come, once again, go round with the basin and ewer. 
Peace ! Silence, silence ! 

Enter a Soothsayer, 7vith a great air of arrogaice and self- 
importance. 

Sooth. Stop the sacrifice ! 

Pei. What are you? 960 

Sooth. A Soothsayer, thats what I am. 

Pei. The worse luck for ye. 

Sooth. Friend, are you In your senses ? 

Dont trifle absurdly with religious matters. 
Heres a prophecy of Bakis, which expressly 
Alludes to Nephelococcugia. 

Pei. How came it, then, you never prophesied 
Your prophecies, before the town was built? 
Sooth. The spirit withheld me. 

Pei. And is it allowable now. 

To give us a communication of them ? 

Sooth. Hem ! 

Moreover, when the Crows and Daws unite, 
To build and settle in the midway, right 
Between tall Corinth and fair Sicyons height, 970 
Then to Pandora let a milk white Goat 
Be slain and offerd, and a comely coat 
Given to the soothsayer, and shoes a pai 
When he to you this oracle shall bear. 



44 



THE BIRDS. 

Pei. Are the shoes mentiond? 

Sooth, pretending to feel for his papers. Look at the book, 
and see ! 

And let him have the entrails for his share. 
Pei. Are the entrails mentiond? 

Sooth, as i?efore. Look at the book, and see ! 

 If you, predestined youth, shall do these things, 
Then you shall soar aloft, on eagles wing 
But, if you do not, you shall never be 
An Eagle, nor a Hawk, nor bird of high degree. 
Pei. Is all this there? 980 

Sooth, as before. Look at the book, and see ! 

Pei. This oracle differs most remarkably 
From that which I transcribed in Apollos temple. 

If at the sacrifice which you prepare, 

An uninvited vagabond should dare 

To interrupt you, and demand a share, 

Let cuffs and buffets be the varlets lot. 

Smite him between the ribs and spare him not. 

Sooth. Nonsense youre talking ! 

Pei. tvith the same action as the Soothsayer, as if he were feelijig 
for papers. Look at the book, and see ! 

Thou shalt in no wise heed them, or forbear 
To lash and smite those Eagles of the air. 
Neither regard their names, for it is written, 
Lampon and Diopeithes shall be smitten. 
\Sooth. Is all this there? 

Pei. producing a horsezahip. Look at the book, and see !] 
Get out, with a plague and a vengeance. 990 

Sooth. Oh dear ! oh ! 

Pei. Go soothsay somewhere else, you rascal, run ! 

\_Exit Soothsayer. 



ACT 11. 45 

Meton the Asi7onomer appears, encumbered with a load of 
mathematical instruments. 

Met. Im come, you see, to join you  

Pet. aside. Another plague ! 

For what ? Whats your design ? Your plan, your notion ? 
Your scheme,  your apparatus,  your equipment  , 
Your outfit ? Whats the meaning of it all ? 

3fet. I mean to take a geometrical plan 
Of your atmosphere  to allot it, and survey it 
In a scientific form. 

Fei. In the name of heaven ! 

Who are ye and what? What name? What manner of man? 

Met. Who am I and what ? Meton s my name, well known 
In Greece, and in the village of Colonos. 

Fei. going up to him. But tell me, pray, these implements, 
these articles, 
What are they meant for? 

Met. These are  Instruments I 

An atmospherical geometrical scale. 

First, you must understand, that the atmosphere looo 

Is formd,  in a manner,  altogether,  partly, 
In the fashion of a furnace, or a funnel 
I take this circular arc, with the moveable arm. 
And so, by shifting it round, till it coincides 
At the angle  you understand me? 

Fei. Not in the least. 

Met. with animation I obtain a true division, with the 

quadrature 
Of the equilateral circle. Here, I trace 
Your market place, in the centre, with the streets 
Converging inwards,  and the roads, diverging 
From the circular wall, without  like solar rays 
From the circular circumference of the Sun. 



46 THE BIRDS. 

Pel. in a pretended soliloquy the?t calling to him with a tone 
of mystery and alartn. 
Another Thales ! absolutely, a Thales ! 

Meton ! loio 

Met, startled. Why, whats the matter? 
Fei. Youre aware 

That Ive a regard for you. Take my advice 
Dont be seen here  Withdraw yoursel abscond ! 
Met. Is there any alarm or risk? 

Fei. Why, much the same 

As it might be in Lacedsemon. Theres a bustle 
Of expelling aUens people are draggd out 
From the inns and lodgings, with a deal of uproar, 
And blows and abuse in plenty, to be met with 
In the pubHc streets. 

Met. A popular tumult  heh? 

Fei. scandalized at the siippositioii. Oh, fie ! no, nothing of 

that kind. 
Met. How do you mean then? 

Fei. Were carrying into effect a resolution 
Adopted latel to discard and cudgel 
Coxcombs and Mountebanks of every kind. 
Met. Perhaps I had best withdraw. 

Fei. Why yes, perhaps  

But yet, I would not answer for it, neithe 
Ferhaps you may be too late the blows I mention d 
Are coming  close upon you  there they come ! \Striki71g hi?n. 
Met. Oh bless me ! 

Fei. Did not I tell you, and give you warning? 

Get out, you coxcomb, find out by your Geometry 
The road you came, and measure it bac youd best. 1020 

[Exit Meto?i. 
A Commissioner from Athens advances with an air of importance 
and asce?ida?icy. 
Com. Is nobody here ? None of the Proxeni, 



ACT II. 47 

To receive and attend upon me? 

Pel. Whats all this? 

Sardanapalus in person come amongst us ! 

Com. I come, appointed as Commissioner 
To Nephelococcugia. 

Pei. A Commissioner ! 

What brings you here? 

Co7n. A paltry scrap of paper, 

A trifling silly decree, that sent me away 
Here to this place of yours. 

Pei. Well now ! suppose, 

To make things easy on both sides  could not you 
Just take your salary at onc and so return. 
Without any further trouble? 

Com. Truly yes, 

Ive other affairs at home a speech and a motion. 
That I meant to have made in the general assembly, 
About a business that I took in hand 
On the part of my friend Pharnaces, the satrap. 

Pei. Agreed then, and farewell. Here, take your salary. 

Coin. Whats here? 1030 

\Peithetairus has held out his left hand as if with an offer of 
money  he grasps the right hand of the Commissioner, a7id with this 
adva7itage proceeds to buffet him?\ 

Pei. A motion on the part of Pharnaces ! 

Com. Bear witness here ! Im beaten and abused 
In my character of Commissioner ! \Exit Commissioner. 

Pei. Get out! 

With your balloting-box and all. Its quite a shame, 
Quite scandalous ! They send commissioners here, 
Before weve finishd our first sacrifice. 

Enter a Hawker ivith copies of new laws relating to the colony, 
which he has bivught out with him, for sale. 

Haw.  Moreover, if a Nephelococcugian 



48 THE BIRDS. 

Should assault or smite an Athenian citizen   
Pci. Whats this ? Whats all this trumpery paper here ? 
Haw. Ive brought you the new laws and ordinances 
And copies of the last decrees to sell. 
Fei. dryly and biiteily. Lets hear em. 
Haw.  Its enacted and ordaind, 

That the Nephelococcugians shall use 
Such standard weights and measures  1040 

Pei. Friend, youll find 

Hard measure here, and a heavy weight, I promise you. 
Upon your shoulders shortly. 

Haw. Whats the matter? 

Whats come to you? 

Pei. Get out, with your decrees ! 

Ive bloody decrees against you, dire decrees. \JDrives Jmn off. 

Com. returning. I summon Peithetairus to his answer, 
In an action of assault and battery. 
For the first day of the month Munychion. 

Pei. Hah ! say you so ? Youre there again ! Have at 

you. \Drives Jmn off. 

Haw. retu7ning. And in case of an assault or violence, 

Against the person of the Magistrate  1050 

Pei. Bless me ! What you ! Youre there again. 

\prives him off. 
Com. 7etiirning again.  Ill ruin yo 

Ill lay my damages at ten thousand drachmas. 

Pei. In the mean time, Ill smash your balloting boxes. 
Com. Remember, how you effaced the public monument 
On the pillar, and defild it, late last night. 

Pei. Pah ! stuff ! There, seize him, somebody. What youre 
off, too. 
Come, lets remove, and get away from hence. 
And sacrifice our goat to the Gods within doors. 

\Exeunt all hut Chorus. 



ACT II. 49 

Chorus. 

Henceforth  our Worth, 

Our Right our Might, 

Shall be shewn, 

Acknowledgd, known 

Mankind shall raise 

Prayers, vows, praise, 

To the Birds alone. 1060 

Our employ, is to destroy 

The vermin train, 

Ravaging amain 

Your fruits and grain 

Were the wardens 

Of your gardens. 

To watch and chase 

The wicked race. 

And cut them shorter 

In hasty slaughter. 1070 

Epirrhema. 

At the present urgent crisis, all your efforts and attention 
Are directed to secure Diagorass apprehension 
Handsome bounties have been offerd of a talent for his head, 
Likewise with respect to Tyrants Tyrants that are gone and 

dead 
Bounties of a talent each, for all that can be killd or caught. 
With a zealous emulation, we, the Birds, have also thought 
Just and proper to proclaim, from this time forth, that we with- 
draw 
From Philocrates, the fowler, the protection of the law 
Furthermore, we fix a price for bringing him alive or dead 
Four, if hes secured alive a single talent for his head 
He, that Ortolans and Quails to market has presumed to bring, 
And the Sparrows, six a penny, tied together in a string, 108 1 
F. 4 



50 THE BIRDS. 

AVith a wicked heart retaining sundry Doves in his employ, 
Fastend with their feet in fetters, forced to serve for a decoy. 
Farther, we declare and publish our command to men below, 
All the Birds you keep in prison, to release and let them go. 
AVe shall, else, revenge ourselves, and we shall teach the tyrants 

yet,   

How to chirp and dance in fetters, in the tangles of a net. 



Chorus. 

Blest are they, 

The Birds alway. 

With perfect clothing, 

Fearing nothing, 1090 

Cold or sleet or summer heat. 

As it chances. 

As he fancies. 
Each his own vagary follows, 
Dwelhng in the dells and hollow 
When, with eager weary strain, 
The shrilly grasshoppers complain, 
Parchd upon the sultry plain, 
Maddend with the raging hea 
We secure a cool retreat, 
In the shady nooks and coves, 
Recesses of the sacred groves. 
Many an herb, and many a berry 
Serves to feast, and make us merry. iioo 

Antepirrhema. 

To the judges of the prize, we wish to mention in a word 
The return we mean to make, if our performance is preferrd. 



ACT II. 



51 



First, then, in your empty coffers you shall see the sterling 
Owl, 
From the mines of Laurium, familiar as a common fowl 
Roosting among the bags and pouches, each at ease upon his 

nest \ 
Undisturbd rearing and hatching little broods of interest 1 108 
If you wish to cheat in office, but are inexpert and raw, 
You should have a Kite for agent, capable to gripe and cla 
Cranes and Cormorants shall help you to a stomach and a throat 
When you feast abroad. But if you give a vile, unfriendly vote, 
Hasten and provide yourselves, each, with a little silver plate, 
Like the statues of the gods, for the protection of his pat 
Else, when forth abroad you ramble on a summer holiday, 
We shall take a dirty vengeance, and befoul your best array. 

Enter Peithetairus. 

Pet. Well, Friends and Birds, the sacrifice has succeeded 
Our omens have been good ones, good and fair. 
But whats the meaning of it? Weve no news 
From the new building yet! No messenger! 11 20 

Oh ! there at last, I see,  Theres somebody 
Running at speed, and panting like a racer. 



Enter a Messenger quite out of breat/i, and speaJzifig in short 

snatches. 

Mess. Where is he? Where? Where is he? Where? 
Where is he?  
The president, Peithetairus? 

Fei. coolly. Here am I. 

Mess, in a gasp for breath. Your fortifications finishd. 

42 



52 



THE BIRDS. 



Pel Well! thats well. 

Mess. A most amazing, astonishing work it is ! 
So that Theagenes and Proxenides 
Might flourish, and gasconade, and prance away, 
Quite at their ease, both of them four-in-hand, 
Driving abreast upon the breadth of the wall. 
Each in his own new chariot. 

Pel. You surprise me. 

Aless. And the height for I made the measurement myself 
Is exactly a hundred fathom. 1131 

Pei. Heaven and earth ! 

How could it be ? Such a mass ! Who could have built it ? 

Mess. The Bird no creature else  no foreigners, 
Egyptian bricklayers, workmen or masons, 
But they themselves alone, by their own efforts 
Even to my surprise, as an eye-witness  
The Birds, I say, completed everything. 
There came a body of thirty thousand Cranes 
I wont be positive, there might be more 
With stones from Africa in their craws and gizzards 
Which the Stone-curlews, and Stone-chatterers 
Workd into shape and finishd. The Sand-Martins, 
And Mud-larks, too, were busy in their department. 
Mixing the mortar, while the Water-Birds, 1140 

As fast as it was wanted, brought the water 
To temper, and work it. 

Pei. in a fidget. But who served the masons ? 

Who did you get to carry it? 

Mess. To carry it? 

Of course the Carrion Crows, and Carrying Pigeons. 

Pei. Yes ! yes ! But after all, to load your hods 



ACT II. 53 

How did you manage that? 

Mess. Oh, capitally, 

I promise you.  There were the Geese, all barefoot, 
Trampling the mortar, and, when all was ready, 
They handed it into the hods so cleverly 
With their flat feet! 

Fei. They footed it, you mean. 

Com it was handily done though, I confess. 

Mess. Indeed, I assure you, it was a sight to see them 
And trains of Ducks there were clambering the ladders, 
With their duck legs, like bricklayers prentices, 1150 

All dapper and handy, with their little trowels. 

Pei. In fact, then, its no use engaging foreigner 
Mere folly and wast weve all within ourselves. 
Ah, well now, come ! But about the woodwork ? Heh ! 
Who were the carpenters ? Answer me that ! 

Mess. The Woodpeckers, of course and there they were. 
Labouring upon the gates, driving and banging. 
With their hard hatchet beaks, and such a din, 
Such a clatter as they made, hammering and hacking, 
In a perpetual peal, pelting away 
Like shipwrights hard at work in the arsenal. 
And now their work is finishd, gates and all. 
Staples and bolts, and bars, and everythin 
The sentries at their post patrols appointe 11 60 

The watchmen in the barbica the beacons 
Ready prepared for lighting all their signals 
Arranged  But Ill step out, just for a moment, 
To wash my hands.  Youll settle all the rest. 

\Exit Messenger. 

Peithetairus remains in an attitude of perplexity afid astonishment. 

Chorus [to Peithetairus, in a self-satisfied tone. 
Heighday ! Why, whats the matter with ye ? Sure ! 
Ah ! well now, I calculate, youre quite astonishd 



54 



THE BIRDS. 



You did not know the nature of our birds 
I guess you thought it an impossible thing 
To finish up your fortification job 
Within the time so cleverly. 

Fei. recovering himself and looking round. Yes, truly. 
Yes, Im surprised, indeed, I must confess  
I could almost imagine to myself 
It was a dream, an illusion altogether  
But theres the watchman of the town, I see. 
In alarm and haste it seems ! Hes running here  

[T/ie Watchman enters, with a shont of alarm. 1170 
Well, whats the matter? 

W. A most dreadful business ! 

One of the Gods just now  Jupiters Gods  
Has bolted through the gates and driven on 
Right into the atmosphere, in spite of us. 
And all the Jackdaws, that were mounting guard. 

Pei. animated at the prospect of having soitiething to ?nanage. 
What an outrage ! What an insult ! Which of em ? 
Which of the Gods? 

Watclwian. We cant pretend to sa 

We just could ascertain that he wore wings. 
Were clear upon that point. 

Fei. But a light party 

Ought surely to have been sent in such a case 
A detachment  

Watchman. A detachment has been sent 
Already a squadron of ten thousand Hawks, 11 80 

Besides a corps of twenty thousand Hobby-hawks, 
As a hght cavalry, to scour the countr 
Vultures and Falcons, Ospreys, Eagles, all 
Have sallied fort the sound of wings is heard, 



ACT 11. 55 

Rushing and whizzing round on every side 

In eager search. The fugitive divinity 

Is not far off, and soon must be discoverd. 

Feu Did nobody think of slingers? Where are they? 
Where are the sHngers got to? Give me a sUng. 
Arrows and sHngs, I say !  Make haste with em. 

Chorus. 

War is at hand, 
On air and land, 

Proclaimd and fixd. 
War and strife. 
Eager and rife, 

Are kindled a-twixt 
This state of ours, 
And the heavenly powers. 

Look with care 1190 

To the circuit of air 

Watch lest he, 

The Deity, 
Whatever he be, 

Should unaware 
Escape and flee. 

But, hark ! The rushing sound of hasty wings 
Approaches us. The deity is at hand. 

Enter lis, flying across the scene. 

Pei. Holloh, you ! Where are ye flying ? Where are ye 
going? 
Hold! Halt! Stop there, I tell ye!  Stop this instant! 1200 
What are ye? Where do you come from? Speak, explain. 

Iris. Me ? From the Gods, to be sure ! the Olympian Gods. 

Pei. pointing to the flaimting appendages of her dress. 
What are ye with all your flying trumpery? 
A helmet, or a galley? Whats your name? 

Iris. Iris, tlie messenger of the Gods. 

Pei A messenger ! 

Oh, youre a naval messenger, I reckon 
The Salaminian galley, or the Paralian ? 



56 



THE BIRDS. 



Youre in full sail, I see. 

Iris. Whats here to do? 

Pei. Are there no birds in waiting? Nobody 
To take her into custody? 

Iris. Me  to custody? 

Why, whats all this? 

Fei. Youll find to your cost, I promise ye. 

Iris. AVell, this seems quite unaccountable ! 

Pei. Which of the gates 

Did ye enter at, ye jade? How came you here? 

Iris. Gates !  I know nothing about your gates, not I. 

Pei. Fine innocent ignorant airs she gives herself! 121 1 
You applied to the Pelicans, I suppose?  The captain 
Of the Cormorants on guard admitted you? 

Iris. Why, what the plague 1 whats this ? 

Pei. So you confess \ 

You came without permission ! 

Iris. Are you mad? 

Pei. Did neither the sitting magistrates nor bird-masters 
Examine and pass you? 

Iris. Examine me, forsooth ! 

Pei. This is the way then ! without thanks or leave 
You ramble and fly, committing trespasses 
In an atmosphere belonging to your neighbours ! 

Iris. And where would you have us fly then? Us, the 
Gods! 

Pei. I neither know nor care.  But I know this  1220 
They shant fly here.  And another thing I kno 
I know that, if there ever was an instance 



ACT II. 



57 



Of an Iris or a rainbow, such as you, 
Detected in the fact, fairly condemn d, 
And justly put to death, it would be you. 

Iris. But Im immortal. 

Fei. coolly and perejnptorily. That would make no differenc 
We should be strangely circumstanced indeed, 
With the possession of a Sovereign Power, 
And you, the Gods, in no subordination, 
No kind of order, fairly mutinying, 
Infringing and disputing our commands. 
Now then, youll please to tell me where youre going? 
Which way youre steering with those wings of yours? 

Iris in a great fright but attejnpting to assume a tone of 
authority. I?... Im commissiond from my father Jove 
To summon human mortals to perform 1231 

Their rites and offerings and oblations, due 
To the powers above. 

Pei. And who do you mean? what powers? 

Iris. What powers ? Ourselves, the Olympian Deities ! 

Pei. So then, youre deities, the rest of ye ! 

Iris. Yes, to be sure what others should there be ? 

Pei. Remember  once for all  that we, the Birds, 
Are the only deities from this time forth. 
And not your father Jove. By Jove ! not he ! 

Iris. Oh, rash, presumptuous wretch ! Incense no more 
The wrath of the angry Gods, lest Ruin drive 
Her ploughshare oer thy mansio and Destruction, 1240 

With hasty besom, sweep thee to the dus 
Or flaming lightning smite thee with a flash. 
Left in an instant smouldering and extinct. 



58 THE BIRDS. 

Pei. Do ye hear her?  Quite in tragedy!  -Quite sublime! 
Come, let me try for a bouncer in return. 
Lets see.  Lets recollect.   Me dost thou deem, 
Like a base Lydian or a Phrygian slave, 
With hyperboHcal bombast to scare? 
I tell ye, and you may tell him  Jupiter, 
If he provokes me and pushes things too far, 
Will see some eagles of mine, to outnumber his, 
With firebrands in their claws, about his house. 
And I shall send a flight of my Porphyrions, 
A hundred covey or more, armd cap-a-pie 1250 

To assault him in his sublime celestial tower 
Perhaps he may remember, in old times 
He found enough to do with one Porphyrion. 
Come, scuttle away convey your person elsewhere 
Be brisk, and leave a vacancy. Brush off. 

Iris. I shall inform my father. He shall know 
Your rudeness and impertinence. He shall  
Hell settle ye and keep ye in order.  You shall see. \Exit Iris. 

Pei. Oh dear ! is it come to that? No, youre mistaken, 1260 
Young woman, upon that point Im not your man 
Im an old fellow grow Im thunder proo 
Proof against flames and darts and female arts 
Youd best look out for a younger customer. 

Chorus. 

Notice is hereby given 
To the deities of heaven. 
Not to trespass here 
Upon our atmosphere. 
Take notice  from the present day 
No smoke or incense is allowd 
To pass this way. 
Pei. Quite strange it is ! quite unaccountable ! 
That herald to mankind that was dispatchd, 
What has become of him?. Hes not yet returnd. 1270 

Enter a Herald. 

Herald. Oh, Peithetairus, happiest, wisest, best. 
Cleverest of men I Oh, most illustrious ! 



ACT II. 59 



Oh, most inordinately fortunate ! 

Oh, most... Oh, do, for shame, do bid me have done. 

Pel What are you saying? 

Her. All the people of Earth 

Have joined in a complimentary vote, decreeing 
-A crown of gold to you, for your exertions. 

Pei. Im much obligd to the people of Earth. But why? 
What was their motive? 

Her. Oh, most noble founder 

Of this supereminent, celestial city. 
You cant conceive the clamour of applause. 
The enthusiastic popularity, 

That attends upon your name th impulse and stir 
That moves among mankind, to colonize 

And migrate hither. In the time before, 1280 

There was a Spartan mania, and people went 
Stalking about the streets with Spartan staves, 
With their long hair unwashd and slovenly. 
Like so many Socrateses but of late 
Birds are the fashion  Birds are all in all  
Their modes of Hfe are grown to be mere copies 
Of the birds habit rising with the Lar 
Scratching and scrabbling suits and informations 
Picking and pecking upon points of la 
Brooding and hatching evidence  in short. 
It has grown to such a pitch, that names of Birds 1290 

Are given to individuals Chaerophon, 
Is calld an Owl Theagenes, a Goose 



6o THE BIRDS. 



Philocles, a Cock Sparro Midias, 

A Dunghill Cock. And all the songs in vogue 1300 

Have something about Birds, Swallows or Dove 

Or about flying, or a wish for wings. 

Such is the state of things, and I must warn you, 
That you may expect to see some thousands of them 
Arriving here, almost immediately, 
With a clamorous demand for wings and claws 
I advise you to provide yourself in time. 

Pei. Come, it wont do then, to stand dawdling her 
Go you, fill the hampers and the baskets there 
With wings, and bid the loutish porter bring them, 13 10 

While I stop here, to encounter the new comers. 

Enter a Young Man singmg. 

 Oh ! for an Eagles force and might, 
Loftily to soar 
Over land and sea, to light 
On a lonely shore. 



ACT IL 6 1 

Fei. Well, heres a song thats something to the purpose. 1340 

Y. Man. Ay, ay, theres nothing like it  wings and flying ! 
Wings are your only sort. Im a bird fancier. 
In the new fashion quite. Ive taken a notion 
To settle and live amongst ye. I like your laws. 

Pei. very gravely a?id methodically. What laws do you mean ? 
Weve many laws amongst us. 

Y. Man. Your laws in general but particularly, 
The law that allows of beating ones own father. 

Pei. Why truly, Yes ! we esteem it a point of valour 
In a Chicken, if he clapperclaws the old Cock. ZS 

Y. Man. That was my view, feeling a wish in fact 
To throttle mine, and seize the property. 

Pei. ivith great candour and composure. 
Yes, but youd find some difficulties her 
An obstacle insurmountable, I conceiv 
An ancient statute standing unrepeald, 
Engraved upon our old Ciconian columns. 
It says that when a Stork, or a Ciconia, 
Has brought his lawful progeny of young Storks 
To birds estate, and enabled them to fly, 
The sire shall stand entitled to a maintenance. 
At the sons cost and charge, in his old age. 

Y. Man with a start of disappointnwit. 
Ive managed finely, it seems, to mend myself! 
Forced to maintain my father after all! 

Pei. in a soothing tone. No, no not quite so bad since 
youre come here, 1360 

As a well-wisher to the establishment. 
Zealous and friendly, well contrive to equip you 
With a suit of armour as a soldiers orphan. 
And now, young man, let me suggest some notions, 
Things that were taught me when a boy. Your father? 



62 THE BIRDS. 

Strike him not! rather take this pair of wing 
And this cockspur giving him a sword imagine youve a 

coxcomb 
Upon your head, to serve you for a hehiie 
Look out for service, and enhst yoursel 
Get into a garrison live upon your pay 
And let your father live. Youre fond of fighting, 
And fond of flying  take a flight to Thrac 
There you may please yourself, and fight your fill. 

Y. Man. By Jove, youre right. The notions not a bad one. 
Ill follow it up ! 13 7 1 

Fei. very gravely aftd quietly. 

Youll find it the best way. [Exit Young Man. 

Enter a Sycophant singing. 
Tell us who the strangers are, 
Gentle Swallow! Birds of air, 
Party-colourd, poor and bare, 1410 

Tell us who the strangers ar 
Gentle Swallow, tell me true. 
Fei. Heres a fine plague broke out ! See yonder fellow 
Sauntering along this way, swaggering and singing. 

Syc. Hoh ! gentle Swallow ! I say, my gentle Swallow, 
My gentle Swallow ! How often must I call ? 

Fei. Why, there it i the prodigal in the fable 
Seeking for Swallows in a ragged coat. 
Syc. in an arrogant, overbeariiig tone. 
Whos he thats set to serve out wings? Where is he? 

Fei. Tis I but what do you want ? You should explain. 
Syc. Wings ! Wings ! You need not have askd me. Wings 
I want. 1420 

Fei. Do you mean to fly for flannel to Pellene? 
Syc. a little disconcerted. No, no! But Im emiloyd-.T 
employ myself 
In fact, among the allies and islander 
Im in the informing line. 



ACT 11. 63 

Pei. in a tone of very grave irony. I wish you joy. 

Syc. And a mover and manager for prosecutions 
In criminal suits, and so forth you understand me 
So I wish to equip myself with a pair of wings 
To whisk about and trounce the islanders. 

Fei. Would it be doing things in better form 
To serve a summons flying, think ye  

Syc. ?iot kno7ving very well what to make of him. No, 
Not tha but just to avoid the risk of pirates, 
To return in company with a flight of cranes, 
As they do with the gravel in their gizzards 
With a belly-full of lawsuits for my ballast. 

Fei. in a grave and someivhat tivaddling tone. 
So this is your employment! A young man 1430 

Like you to be an informer ! Is it possible ? 

Syc. Why shouldnt it? I was never bred to labour. 

Fei. as before. But sure, there are other lawful occupations, 
In which a brisk young fellow, such as you, 
Might earn an honest, decent livelihood 
In credit and good will, without informing. 

Syc. thoroughly taken in, becomes emphatically insolent. 
Wings, my good fellow !  wings I want  not words ! 

Fei. dryly. Im giving you wings already. 

Syc. a little puzzled. What, with words ? 

Is that your way? 

Fei. in a tone of very grave banter. 

Yes, for mankind in general 
Are wingd, as it were, and brought to plume themselves 
In different ways, by speeches and discourse. 

Syc. confused and puzzled. What, all ? 

Fei. as before. Yes, all. Ill give you a striking instance 
You must have heard yourself elderly people 
Sitting conversing in a barbers shop. 
And one says  Well, Diitrephes has talkd 1440 



64 THE BIRDS. 

So much to my young man, he has brought him at last 
To plume himself in driving. And another 
Says that his son is quite amongst the clouds, 
Grown flighty of late with studying tragedy. 

Syc. zvith a sort of hesitating laugh. 
So words are wings, you say. 

Pei. No doubt of it. 

I say it, and I repeat i human nature 
Is marvellously raisd and elevated 
By words. I was in hopes that I might raise you. 
By words of good advice, to another sphere, 
To live in an honest calling. 1450 

Syc. feeling himself bantered and beaten but restive and angry. 

But I wont, though. 

Pei. coolly. Why, what will you do? 

Syc. sulkily at first, but aniinating as he proceeds. 

Why I wont disgrace my family 
My father, and my grandfather before him, 
Served as informer and Ill stick to it, 
The profession.  So youll please to hand em me out, 
A pair of your best wings, Vultures or Hawks, 
To fly to the islands, with my summonses, 
And home again to record them in the courts. 
And out again to the islands. 

Pei. in a tone of interest. Yes, thats well 
I understand ye, I thin your method is, 
To be beforehand with em ? Your defendant, 
You get him cast for non-appearance, heh ! 
Before he can arriv and finish him 
In his absence, heh? 

Syc. completely taken in, delighted, rubbing his hands. 
By Jove, youre up to it ! 

Pei. Then, whilst hes sailing here you get the start, 
And fly, to pounce upon the property, 
To rummage out the chattels. i45o 

Syc.  Thats the trick, 



ACT IL 65 



The notion of it !  I see youre up to it.  
A man must whisk about, here and away, 
Just hke a whipping-top. 

Pet. Ay, yes, youre righ 

I understand you. The instance is a good one. 
A whipping-top, you say. Well, by good luck, 
Ive here a capital, slashing suit of wings 
To serve ye, made of a cow-hide from Corcyra. 

Syc. Oh, heaven ! whats there ? a horsewhip ? 

Pei. Wings, I tell ye. 

To whisk ye abou to flog ye and make ye fly. 

Syc. Oh dear ! oh dear ! 

Pei. Scamper away, you scoundrel ! 

Vanish, you vagabond ! whisk yourself off ! 
Ill pay ye for your practices in the courts  
Your pettifoggicorascalities. \Exit Sycophant. 

To the attendants 
Come, bundle up the wing lets take em back. \Exeunt. 

Chorus. 

Strophe. 

We have flown and we have run, 1470 

Viewing marvels many a one. 
In every land beneath the sun. 

But the strangest sight to see 
Was a huge exotic tree. 
Growing, without heart or pith, 
Weak and sappy, like a wyth 
But with leaves and boughs withal, 
Comely, flourishing, and tall. 

This the learned all ascribe 
To the Sycophantic trib 
But the natives there, like us. 
Call it a Cleonymus. 
In the springs delightful hours 
It blossoms with rhetoric flower 



F. 



66 THE BIRDS. 



I saw it standing in the field, 

With leaves in figure like a shiel 

On the first tempestuous day 1480 

I saw it cast those leaves away. 

Antistrophe. 

 There lies a region out of sight, 
Far within the realm of night, 
Far froni torch and candle-light. 
There in feasts of meal and wine 
Men and demigods may joi 
There they banquet and they dine, 
Whilst the light of day prevail 
At sunset their assurance fails. 
If any mortal then presumes, 1490 

Orestes, sallying from the tombs, 
Like a fierce heroic sprite. 
Assaults and strips the lonely wight. 

Enter Prometheus muffled up, peeping about him. 

Pro. Oh, dear ! if Jupiter should chance to see me ! 
Wheres Peithetairus ? Where? 

Pei. re-entering. Why, whats all this? 

This fellow muffled up? 

Pro. Do look behind m 

Is anybody watching? any Gods 
Following and spying after me? 



ACT II. 67 



Pet. , No, non 

None that I see theres nobody  But you ! 
What are ye ? 

Fro. Tell me, whats the time of day? 

Fei. Why, noo past noo but tell me, who are ye? 
Speak. 1500 

Fro. Much past? How much? 

Fei. aside. Confound the fool, I say ! 

The insufferable blockhead ! 

Fro. Hows the sky? 

Open or overcast? Are there any clouds? 

Fei. aloud and angrily. 
Be hangd ! 

Fro. Then Ill disguise myself no longer. 

throws off his cloak. 

Fei. My dear Prometheus ! 

Fro. Hold your tongue, I be 

Dont mention my name ! If Jupiter should see me 
Or overhear ye, Im ruind and undone. 
But now, to give you a full complete account 
Of everything thats passing there in Heaven  
The present state of things  But first, Ill trouble you 
To take the umbrella, and hold it overhead. 
Lest they should overlook us. 

Fei. What a thought ! 1 5 1 o 

Just like yourself ! A true Promethean thought ! 
Stand under it, here ! Speak boldly never fear. 

Fro. Dye mind me? 



68 THE BIRDS, 



Pei. Yes, I mind y speak away. 

Fro. emphatically. Jupiters ruind ! 

Fei. Ruind ! How ? Since when ? 

Fro. From the first hour you fortified and planted 
Your atmospheric settlements. Ever since 
Theres not a mortal offers anything 
In the shape of sacrifice.  No smoke of victims ! 
No fumes of incense ! Absolutely nothing ! 
Were keeping a strict fast  fasting perforce, 
From day to day  the whole community. 

And the inland barbarous Gods in the upper country 1520 

Are broken out, quite mutinous and savage, 
With hunger and ange threatening to come down 
With all their force, if Jupiter refuses 
To open the ports and allow them a free traffic 
For their entrails and intestines, as before. 

Fei. a little ajinoyed at being obliged to ask. 
What, are there other barbarous Gods besides 
In the upper country? 

Fro. Barbarous? To be sur 

Theyre all of Execestidess kindred. 

Fei. as before hesitating, but with a so?i of affected ease. 
Well... but... the name no These same barbarous deities... 
What name do you call em? 

Fro. Call them! The TribaUi 1 

Fei. Ah ! well, then, that accounts for our old saying  
Confound the Tribe of them ! 1530 

Fro. drily. Precisely so. 

But now to business. Thus much I can tell ye 



ACT IT. 69 

That envoys will arrive immediately 

From Jupiter and those upland wild Triballi, 

To treat for a peace. But you must not consent 

To ratify or conclude, till Jupiter 

Acknowledges the sovereignty of the Birds, 

Surrendering up to you the Sovereign Queen, 

Whom you must marry. 

Fez. Why, what Queen is that? 

Fro. What Queen?  A most delightful, charming girl  
Joves housekeeper, that manages his matters, 
Serves out his thunderbolts, arranges everythin 
The constitutional laws and liberties, 1540 

Morals and manners, the marine department, 
Freedom of speech, and threepence for the juries. 

Fet. Why, that seems all in all. 

Fro. Yes, everything 

I tell y in having her, youve everythin 
I came down hastily to say thus muc 
Im hearty, ye kno I stick to principle. 
Steady to the human interest  always was. 

Fei. Yes, were obliged to you for our roast victuals. 

Fro. And I hate these present Gods you know, most 
thoroughly 
I need not tell you that. 

Fei. with a sneer. No, no, you need not, 

Youre known of old for an enemy to the Gods. 

Fro. Yes, yes, like Timo Im a perfect Timo 
Just such another. But I must be goin 

Give me the umbrell if Jupiter should see me, 1550 

Hell think that Im attending a procession. 

Fei. Thats well but dont forget the folding chair, 
For a part of your disguise. Here, take it with you. 

[Exit Fr met heus followed by Feithetairus, 



ACT III. 

Scene as in Act II, except that the gates a?id walls are see?i half- 
built. Peithetairus standing at a stove, busily engaged in 
cooking. 

Eiiter Neptune, the Triballian Envoy, Hercules. 

Nep. Theres Nephelococcugia, thats the town, 
The point were bound to, with our embassy. 

Turning to the Triballian Envoy 
But you ! What a figure have ye made yourself ! 
What a way to wear a mantle ! slouching off 
From the left shoulder! Hitch it round, I tell ye, 
On the right side. For shame,  come,  s thats better, 
These folds too, bundled up. There, throw them round 
Even and easy,  so. Why, youre a savage, 
A natural born savage. Oh, democracy! 1570 

What will it bring us to? when such a ruffian 
Is voted into an embassy ! 

Tri. to Neptune who is pulli7ig his dress about. Come, hands 
off! 
Hands off! 

Nep. Keep quiet, I tell ye, and hold your tongue, 

For a very beas in all my life in heaven, 
I never saw such another. Hercules, 
I say, what shall we do? What should you think? 

Her. What would I do ? What do I think ? Ive told you 



ACT III. 



Already  I think to throttle him  the fellow, 
Whoever he is, thats keeping us blockaded. 

Nep. Yes, my good frien but we were sent, you know, 
To treat for a Peace. Our embassy is for peace. 

Her. That makes no differenc or if it does, 
It makes me long to throttle him the more. 

Pei. very busy affecting not to see theni. 
Give me the Silphium spice. Wheres the cheese grater? 
Bring cheese here, somebody! Mend the charcoal fire. 1590 

Her. Mortal, we greet you and hail you ! Three of us. 
Three deities  

Pei. wit/ioiit looking up. But Im engaged at present 
A little busy, you see, mixing my sauce. 

Her. Why sure ! How can it be ? what dish is this ? 
Birds seemingly ! 

Pei. without looking up. Some individual birds, 
Opposed to the popular democratic birds, 
Renderd themselves obnoxious. 

Her. So, youve pluckd them, 

And put them into sauce, provisionally? 

Pei. looking up. Oh I bless me, Hercules, Im quite glad 
to see you ! 
What brings you here? 

Her. Were come upon an embassy 

From Heaven, to put an end to this same war  

Serv. to Peithetairus. The cruets empty, our oil is out. 

Pei. No matter, 

Fetch more, fetch plenty, I tell ye. We shall want it. 1590 

Her.  For, in fact it brings no benefit to us. 
The continuance of the War prolonging i 
And you yourselves, by being on good terms 



THE BIRDS. 



Of harmony with the Gods  why, for the future. 
Youd never need to know the want of rain, 
For water in your tanks and we could serve ye 
With reasonable, seasonable weather, 
According as you wishd it, wet or dry. 
And this is our commission coming here, 
As envoys, with authority to treat 

Pei. Well, the dispute, you know, from the beginning 
Did not originate with us. The war 
If we could hope in any way to bring you 
To reasonable terms might be concluded. 
Our wishes, I declare it, are for Peace, 
If the same wish prevails upon your par 
The arrangement in itself, is obvious. 
A retrocession on the part of Jupiter. 

The Birds again to be reintegrated 1600 

In their estate of sovereignty. This seems 
The fair resul and if we can conclude, 
I shall hope to see the ambassadors to supper. 

Her. Well, this seems satisfactor I consent. 

Nep. to Hercules. Whats come to ye ? What do ye mean ? 
Are ye gone mad? 
You glutton ! would you ruin your own father. 
Depriving him of his ancient sovereignty? 

Fei. Indeed !  And would not it be a better method 
For all you Deities, and confirm your power. 
To leave the Birds to manage things below? 
You sit there, muffled in your clouds above, 
While all mankind are shifting, skulking, lurking, 
And perjuring themselves here out of sight. 
Whereas, if you would form a steady strict 1610 

Alliance with the Birds, when any man 
Using the common old familiar oath  
By Jupiter and the crow forswore himself, 
The Crow would pick his eyes out, for his pains. 

Nep. Well, that seems plausible  thats fairly put. 

Her. I think so, too. 

Fei. to the Triballian. Well, what say you ? 



ACT III. 73 

Trib. Say true. 

Pei. very volubly  quite at his ease. 
Yes. He consents, you see ! But Ill explain now 
The services and good offices we could do you. 
Suppose a mortal made a vow, for instance, 
To any o Yo then he delays and shuffles. 
And says, The Gods are easy creditors. 1620 

In such a case, we could assist ye, I say, 
To levy a fine. 

JVeJf. How would you do it? Tell me. 

Pel. Why, for example, when hes counting money. 
Or sitting in the bath, we give the warrant 
To a poursuivant of ours, a Kite or Magpie 
And they pounce down immediately, and distrain 
Cash or apparel, money or moneys worth. 
To twice the amount of your demand upon him. 

Her. Well, Im for giving up the sovereignty, 
For my part. 

JVeJ. The Triballian, what says he? 

Jer. aside to the Triballian shelving his fist\ 
You, Si do you want to be well bangd or not? 
Mind how you vote ! Take care how you provoke me. 

Trib. Yaw, yaw. Goot, goot. 

Her. Hes of the same opinion. 

Nep. Then, since youre both agreed, I must agree. 1630 

Her. [shoiiti?tg to Peithetairics. 
Well, you ! Weve settled this concern, you see, 
About the sovereignt were all agreed. 

Pei. O faith, theres one thing more, I recollect, 
Before we par a point that I must mention. 
As for dame Juno, well not speak of he 
Ive no pretensions, Jupiter may keep he 
But, for that other Queen, his manager. 
The sovereign Goddess, her surrender to me 



74 THE BIRDS. 

Is quite an article indispensable. 

Ne_p. with gravity mid dignity. Your views, I find, are not 
disposed for peac 
We must turn homewards. 

Pei. As you please, so be it. 

Cook, mind what youre about there with the sauce 
Lets have it rich and savory, thicken it up ! 

Her. How now, man? Neptune! are you flying off? 
Must we remain at war, here, for a woman? 

Nep. But, what are we to do? 1640 

Her. Do? Why, make peace. 

Nep. in great wrath. I pity you really ! I feel quite 
ashamd 
And sorry to see yo ruining yourself! 
If anything should happen to your father, 
After surrendering the sovereignty. 
Whats to become of you? When you yourself 
Have voted away your whole inheritance 
At his decease, you must remain a beggar. 

Fei. aside to Hercules. Ah there! I thought s hes coming 
over ye 
Step here, a moment ! Let me speak to ye ! 
Your Uncles chousing you, my poor dear friend, 
Youve not a farthings worth of expectation, 
From what your father leaves. Ye cant inherit 
By la yere illegitimate, ye know. 1650 

Her. Heighday I Why, what do you mean ? 

Pei. I mean the Fact ! 

Your mother was a foreigne Minerva 
Is counted an heiress, everybody knows 
How could that be, supposing her own father 
To have had a lawful heir? 



ACT III. 75 

Her. But, if my Father 

Should choose to leave the property to me, 
In his last Will. 

Pei. The law would cancel it ! 

And Neptune, he thats using all his influence 
To work upon ye, hed be the very first 
To oppose ye, and oust ye, as the testators brother. 
Ill tell ye what the law says, Solons law 1660 

 A foreign heir shall not succeed. 
Where there are children of the lawful breed 
But, if no native heir there be. 
The kinsman nearest in degree 
Shall enter on the property. 

Her. Does nothing come to me then?  Nothing at all, 
Of all my father leaves? 

Pei. Nothing at all, 

I should conceive. But you perhaps can tell m 
Did He, your Father, ever take ye with him, 
To get ye enrolld upon the register? 

Her. No truly, I  thought it strange  he  never did. 1670 

Pei. Well, but dont think things strange. Dont stand 
there, stammering. 
Puzzling and gaping. Trust yourself to me, 
Tis I must make your fortune after all ! 

If youll reside and settle amongst us here, 
Ill make you chief Commander among the Birds, 
Captain, and Autocrat and every thing. 
Here you shall domineer and rule the roast, 
With splendour and opulence and pigeons milk. 

Her. in a 7nore audible voice  and in a formal decided to?ie. 
I agreed with you before I think your argument 
Unanswerable. I shall vote for the surrender. 

Pei. to Neptune. And what say you ? 

Nep. firmly and vehemently. Decidedly, I dissent. 

Pei. Then it depends upon our other friend, 
It rests with the Triballian. What say you? 



76 THE BIRDS. 

Tri. Me tell you pretty girl, grand beautiful Queen, 
Give him to Birds. 

Her. Ay, give her up, you mean. 

Nep. Mean ! He knows nothing about it. He means 
nothing 1680 

But chattering like a Magpie. 

Pei. Well, The Magpies 

He means the Magpies or the Birds in general. 
The Republic of the Birds  their government  
That the surrender should be made to them. 

Nep. in great wrath. Well, settle it yourselve amongst 
yourselves 
In your own style Ive nothing more to say. 

Her. to Peithetairus. Come, were agreed in fact to grant 
your term 
But you must come, to accompany us to the sk 
To take back this same Queen, and the other matters. 

Pei. very quietly. It happens lucky enough, with this pro- 
vision 
For a marriage feast. It seems prepared on purpose. 

Her. Indeed, and it does. Suppose in the meanwhile, 
I superintend the cookery, and turn the roast, 
While you go back together. 1690 

Nep. with a start of surprise and disgust. Turn the roast ! 

A pretty employment ! Wont you go with us ? 

Her. No thank y Im mighty comfortable here. 

Pei. Come, give me a marriage robe I must be going. 
[Exeunt Peithetairus and the three gods. 

Interval. 

Harbinger or Herald, a7inouncing the approach of Peithetairus. 
O fortunate ! O triumphant ? O beyond 
All power of speech or thought, supremely blest. 



ACT in. yy 

Prosperous happy Birds !  Behold your King, 

Here in his glorious palace !  Mark his entrance, 

Dazzhng all eyes, resplendent as a Sta 

Outshining all the golden lights, that beam, 1710 

From the rich roof, even as a summer Sun, 

Or brighter than the Sun, blazing at Noon. 

He comes and at his side a female form 
Of beauty ineffabl wielding on high, 
In his right hand, the winged thunderbolt, 
Joves weapon. While the fumes of incense spread, 
Circling around and subtle odours steal 
Upon the senses from the wreathed smoke,  
Curling and rising in the tranquil air. 
See, there He stands ! Now must the sacred Muse 
Give with auspicious words her welcome due. 

Semichorus. 

Stand aside and clear the ground, 1720 

Spreading in a circle round 
With a worthy welcomin 
To salute our noble King 
In his splendour and his pride, 
Coming hither side by side, 
With his happy lovely bride. 
O the fair delightful face ! 
What a figure ! What a grace ! 
What a presence ! What a carriage ! 
What a noble worthy marriage ! 
Let the Birds rejoice and sing. 
At the wedding of the King 
Happy to congratulate 

Such a blessing to the state. 1730 

Hymen Hymen Hoh ! 



yS THE BIRDS. 

Jupiter, that God sublime, 

When the Fates, in former time, 

Matchd him with the Queen of Heaven, 

At a solemn banquet given, 

Such a feast was held above 

And the charming God of Love, 

Being present in command, 

As a Bridesman took his stand, 1740 

With the golden reins in hand. 

Hymen Hymen Hoh ! 
Pci. I accept and approve the marks of your love, 
Your music and verse I applaud and admire. 

Chorus. 

\Pei? But raise your invention, and raising it higher. 
Describe me the terrible engine of Jove, 
The thunder of Earth and the thunder above. 

[C/io.] O dreaded Bolt of Heaven, 

The Clouds with horror cleaving, 

And ye terrestrial thunders deep and low 1750 

Closed in the subterranean caves below. 

That even at this instant growl and rage. 

Shaking with awful sound this earthly stag 

Our King by you has gaind his du 

By your assistance, yours alone, 

Everything is made his own, 

Joves dominion and his thron 

And his happiness and pride. 

His delightful lovely bride. 

Hymen Hymen Hoh ! 



ACT III. 79 

[Fei. Birds of ocean and of air, 
Hither in a troop repair, 
To the royal ceremony, 
Our triumphant matrimony ! 

Come for us to feast and feed ye ! 

Come to revel dance and sing !  
Lovely creature ! Let me lead ye 
Hand in hand, and wing to wing.] 




P.S. The numbering of the lines is that of Meineke which is 
followed also in the acting edition. 



TRANSLATION OF THE PARABASIS. 

11. 685-723- 
By a. C. SWINBURNE. 



Come on then, ye dwellers by nature in darkness, and like to 

the leaves generations, 
That are little of might, that are moulded of mire, unenduring 

and shadowlike nations, 
Poor plumeless ephemerals, comfortless mortals, as visions of 

shadows fast fleeing. 
Lift up your mind unto us that are deathless, and dateless the 

date of our being 
Us, children of heaven, us, ageless for aye, us, all of whose thoughts 

are eternal 
That ye may from henceforth, having heard of us all things 

aright as to matters supernal, 
Of the being of birds and beginnings of gods, and of streams, and 

the dark beyond reaching, 

F. 6 



82 TRANSLATION OF THE PARABASIS. 

Truthfully knowing aright, in my name bid Prodicus pack with his 

preaching. 
It was Chaos and Night at the first, and the blackness of darkness, 

and Hells broad border. 
Earth was not, nor air, neither heaven when in depths of the 

womb of the dark without order 
First thing first-born of the black-plumed Night was a wind-egg 

hatched in her bosom, 
Whence timely with seasons revolving again sweet Love burst out 

as a blossom, 
Gold winds gleaming forth of his back, like whirlwinds gustily 

turning. 
He, after his wedlock with Chaos, whose wings are of darkness, in 

Hell broad-burning. 
For his nestlings begat him the race of us first, and upraised us 

to light new-Hghted. 
And before this was not the race of the gods, until all things by 

Love were united 
And of kind united with kind in communion of nature the sky 

and the sea are 
Brought forth, and the earth, and the race of the gods everlasting 

and blest. So that we are 
Far away the most ancient of all things blest. And that we 

are of Loves generation 
There are manifest manifold signs. We have wings, and with us 

have the Loves habitation 
And manifold fair young folk that forswore love once, ere the 

bloom of them ended, 



TRANSLATION OF THE PARABASIS. 83 

Have the men that pursued and desired them subdued, by the 

help of us only befriended, 
With such baits as a quail, a flamingo, a goose, or a cocks comb 

staring and splendid. 
All best good things that befall men come from us birds, as 

is plain to all reason 
For first we proclaim and make known to them spring, and the 

winter and autumn in season 
Bid sow, when the crane starts clanging for Afric, in shrill-voiced 

emigrant number, 
And calls to the pilot to hang up his rudder again for the season, 

and slumbe 
And then weave cloak for Orestes the thief, lest he strip men of 

theirs if it freezes. 
And again thereafter the kite reappearing announces a change in 

the breezes, 
And that here is the season for shearing your sheep of their 

spring wool. Then does the swallow 
Give you notice to sell your greatcoat, and provide something 

light for the heat thats to follow. 
Thus are we as Ammon, or Delphi, unto you, Dodona, nay, 

Phoebus Apollo. 
For, as first ye come all to get auguries of birds, even such is in 

all things your carriage, 
Be the matter a matter of trade, or of earning your bread, or of 

any ones marriage. 
And all things ye lay to the charge of a bird that belong to 

discerning prediction 



84 TRANSLATION OF THE PARABASIS. 

Winged fame is a bird, as you reckon you sneeze, and the sign s 

as a bird for conviction 
All tokens are birds with you  sounds too, and lackeys, and 

donkeys. Then must it not follow 
That we are to you all as the manifest godhead that speaks in 

prophetic Apollo? 